Information Fusion 115 (2025) 102719

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Information Fusion
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/inffus

Attention-guided hierarchical fusion U-Net for uncertainty-driven medical
image segmentation
Afsana Ahmed Munia a , Moloud Abdar a ,∗, Mehedi Hasan a , Mohammad S. Jalali b ,
Biplab Banerjee c , Abbas Khosravi a , Ibrahim Hossain a , Huazhu Fu d , Alejandro F. Frangi e
a

Institute for Intelligent Systems Research and Innovation (IISRI), Deakin University, Waurn Ponds, 3216, Victoria, Australia
MGH Institute for Technology Assessment, Harvard Medical School, Harvard University, Boston, USA
c CSRE Department, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai, Maharashtra 400076, India
d Institute of High-Performance Computing (IHPC), Agency for Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore, Singapore
e Christabel Pankhurst Institute, Schools of Engineering and Health Sciences, The University of Manchester, Manchester, M13 9PL, United Kingdom
b

ARTICLE

INFO

Keywords:
Medical image segmentation
Uncertainty quantification
Feature fusion
Deep learning

ABSTRACT
Small inaccuracies in the system components or artificial intelligence (AI) models for medical imaging could
have significant consequences leading to life hazards. To mitigate those risks, one must consider the precision
of the image analysis outcomes (e.g., image segmentation), along with the confidence in the underlying model
predictions. U-shaped architectures, based on the convolutional encoder–decoder, have established themselves
as a critical component of many AI-enabled diagnostic imaging systems. However, most of the existing
methods focus on producing accurate diagnostic predictions without assessing the uncertainty associated with
such predictions or the introduced techniques. Uncertainty maps highlight areas in the predicted segmented
results, where the model is uncertain or less confident. This could lead radiologists to pay more attention
to ensuring patient safety and pave the way for trustworthy AI applications. In this paper, we therefore
propose the Attention-guided Hierarchical Fusion U-Net (named AHF-U-Net) for medical image segmentation.
We then introduce the uncertainty-aware version of it called UA-AHF-U-Net which provides the uncertainty
map alongside the predicted segmentation map. The network is designed by integrating the Encoder Attention
Fusion module (EAF) and the Decoder Attention Fusion module (DAF) on the encoder and decoder sides
of the U-Net architecture, respectively. The EAF and DAF modules utilize spatial and channel attention
to capture relevant spatial information and indicate which channels are appropriate for a given image.
Furthermore, an enhanced skip connection is introduced and named the Hierarchical Attention-Enhanced
(HAE) skip connection. We evaluated the efficiency of our model by comparing it with eleven well-established
methods for three popular medical image segmentation datasets consisting of coarse-grained images with
unclear boundaries. Based on the quantitative and qualitative results, the proposed method ranks first in two
datasets and second in a third. The code can be accessed at: https://github.com/AfsanaAhmedMunia/AHFFusion-U-Net.

1. Introduction
Medical image segmentation (MIS) classifies image pixels semantically [1] according to the local geometric structure, their visual
consistency or radiometric properties. In practice, medical image segmentation (MIS) presents challenges for both expert radiologists and
computer algorithms. However, it underpins many critical diagnostic
radiology examinations, such as quantitative evaluation of organ function, determining the extent and grade of organ lesions, post-treatment

recovery after radiation, hyperthermia, ablation, etc. [2]. Furthermore,
the success or failure of MIS has a consequential impact on downstream
tasks associated with clinical diagnosis, surgical planning, radiation
therapy planning, etc. However, the relationship between MIS and
subsequent tasks is as complex and dominant as it is unclear and unexplored [2]. Various medical imaging modalities can be used as input for
medical image segmentation, including PET [3], SPECT [4], CT [5], and
MRI [6]. Each modality has inherent aleatoric (measurement) errors

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: amunia@deakin.edu.au (A.A. Munia), m.abdar1987@gmail.com (M. Abdar), mmhasan@deakin.edu.au (M. Hasan),
MSJALALI@mgh.harvard.edu (M.S. Jalali), bbanerjee@iitb.ac.in (B. Banerjee), abbas.khosravi@deakin.edu.au (A. Khosravi), i.hossain@deakin.edu.au
(I. Hossain), hzfu@ieee.org (H. Fu), alejandro.frangi@manchester.ac.uk (A.F. Frangi).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.inffus.2024.102719
Received 2 June 2024; Received in revised form 3 September 2024; Accepted 25 September 2024
Available online 9 October 2024
1566-2535/© 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

Information Fusion 115 (2025) 102719

A.A. Munia et al.

measuring uncertainty during training does not guarantee an increase
in accuracy or Intersection over Union (IoU) scores. Instead, it offers
a quantification of certainty for each prediction. We specifically chose
three datasets: the breast ultrasound image dataset [22] and two sets of
skin lesion segmentation datasets (ISIC16 [23] and ISIC17 [24]), which
include low-resolution images and unclear edges, reflecting real-world
medical conditions.

and epistemic (causal) uncertainty that remain unaccounted for by
many predictive AI algorithms underpinned by medical imaging.
Initially, traditional methods such as edge detection, thresholding, region-based methods, clustering, etc., were commonly used to
segment images [7]. Today, these methods are limited to straightforward segmentation tasks. As opposed to traditional image analysis,
deep learning technologies offer significantly improved abilities to
handle large and complex data sets [8]. More specifically, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), have remarkably succeeded in medical image segmentation. For example, Fully Convolutional Networks
(FCNs) [9], Cascaded FCN [10], U-Net [11], U-Net++ [12], V-Net [13],
SegNet [14] have shown excellent performance in diversified medical
imagery and applications. CNNs have been extended and improved
in several ways. For instance, combining or integrating features from
different scales or levels greatly enhances a model’s representational
power and performance. By using skip connections, it is possible to utilize the features of the encoder during upsampling on the decoder side
and combine them accordingly. Hence, almost all encoder–decoderbased segmentation architectures use skip connections to benefit from
various image scales, leading to better segmentation accuracy [2].
Although concatenation or addition are popular as basic feature
fusion operators, there are situations where attentional feature fusion
could lead to improved performance [15]. For example, a wide range
of variations in medical image segmentation is possible due to different
imaging modes, individual patient traits, and anatomical differences.
In this case, the attention mechanism (spatial or channel-wise [16])
can prioritize the most relevant features that may ensure robust segmentation results [17]. The attention mechanism emphasizes relevant
information in an image while suppressing irrelevant ones. This is
similar to how we often pay more attention to a few words of a
sentence or look at specific parts of the image while describing some
text or image [18]. Oktay et al. [19] propose Attention Gates (AG)
within their ‘‘Attention U-Net’’ architecture. This attention mechanism
discards irrelevant regions from an input image, while emphasizing
dominant features.
Most deep learning models today achieve higher accuracy for segmenting images yet overlook a significant aspect: providing confidence
estimates (certainty vs uncertainty) behind model predictions or, equivalently, accounting for model’s uncertainty. Despite the success of deep
learning models, it is difficult to answer the question ’How confident is
the model about its generated predictions?’ Determining how confident
these techniques are in their outcomes (predictions) is an important
domain of research in Artificial Intelligence (AI), particularly in deep
learning and machine learning. Thus, it demands developing novel
methodologies to comprehend and measure the certainty (confidence)
of various deep learning and machine learning models. Therefore, measuring the uncertainty in the predicted result of image segmentation
can produce more detailed interpretable output necessary to achieve
user trust, for instance, in the case of ambiguous medical images where
fine-drawn structures or regions are indistinguishable. In this situation,
radiologists could provide more accurate results if they provide the predicted results with an uncertainty map [20]. Abdar et al. [21] presented
a review of uncertainty quantification methods used in various deep
learning methods to measure uncertainty in different fields.
In this paper, we integrate spatial and channel-wise attention and
Hierarchical Attention-Enhanced (HAE) skip connections with the basic
U-Net model. Spatial attention can help identify intricate relationships
and structures in medical images. On the other hand, channel-wise
attention emphasizes the interchannel relationships and dependencies.
Overall, the dual-attention mechanisms and HAE skip connections enhance the model’s ability to capture long-range dependencies and a
more comprehensive understanding of the entire image, which ensures
richer segmentation. Furthermore, We propose an uncertainty-aware
version of our proposed AHF-U-Net that is trained with a specially
designed loss function and can provide prediction results with additional uncertainty scores. However, it is crucial to understand that

2. Related work
Taking into account that we have developed a MIS model that
incorporates a U-shaped CNN model with attentional feature fusion
and also provides an uncertainty-aware version of it, we divide this
literature review section into three sub-sections: Medical Image Segmentation (MIS), Attentional Feature Fusion (AFF) and Uncertainty
of MIS. Inside the MIS sub-section, we discuss several CNN-based
segmentation techniques that have shown promising results in medical
image segmentation. We summarize the different types of attention
mechanisms and the use of attention mechanisms in medical image
segmentation in the following sub-section. Lastly, we review some
previously established works that consider uncertainty quantification
in MIS.
2.1. Medical Image Segmentation (MIS)
The U-Net architecture [11], which serves as a milestone for medical
image segmentation, consists of an encoder–decoder architecture. The
nature of this type of architecture is to reduce and expand the spatial
dimension of the input image. On the encoder side, spatial dimensions
are reduced, and contextual information is captured simultaneously
while the decoder expands spatial dimensions. Another unique trait
of this type of architecture is skipping connections. This makes it
possible to combine low- and high-level features to generate a detailed
segmentation map.
Following U-Net’s success, several methods were developed that
either incorporated U-Net as a backbone architecture or modified it
to meet specific requirements. For example, U-Net++ [12] follows the
same architecture as U-Net but replaces the basic skip connections with
nested and dense skip connections. This architecture is more applicable
for reusing the lower-layer features and measuring the semantic gap
between the feature maps. However, skip connections in U-Net++ [12]
can connect encoders and decoders at the same scale, while a fullscale skip connection is provided in U-Net 3+ [25]. In this type of
skip connection, feature maps from the same and smaller scales on
the encoder side can be connected to the decoder side. Furthermore,
the redesigned U-Net 3 + decoder network [25] is interconnected
within decoder subnetworks. These improvements allow U-Net 3+ [25]
to incorporate better multiscale features that improve segmentation
accuracy. Fig. 1 shows the basic architecture of these three and our
proposed architecture. Similarly, CU-Net [26] establishes a connectivity
pattern among several stacked U-Nets so that information can flow
more efficiently between multiple U-Nets. ‘‘U-Net and its variants for
MIS’’ is reviewed by Siddique et al. [27] and Ummadi [28].
Additionally, few architectures focus on 3D imaging, e.g.,
H-DenseU-Net [29] consists of a 2-D DenseU-Net and its 3-D counterpart for hierarchically aggregating volumetric contexts in the spirit
of the auto context algorithm for liver segmentation, 3D U-Net [30]
replaces all 2D operations of U-Net with their 3D counterpart to
segment the 3D kidney of Xenopus, V-Net [13] is another popular
network for 3D image segmentation which can be trained end-to-end
on MRI volumes for depicting prostate and also handles class imbalance
problem with the integration of dice coefficient-based loss function.
2.2. Attentional feature fusion
In general, medical images contain complex structures and finedrawn irregularities. Therefore, to achieve more precise and meaningful
2

Information Fusion 115 (2025) 102719

A.A. Munia et al.

Fig. 1. U-Net models proposed in the literature: (a) Original U-Net [11], (b) U-Net++ [12], (c) U-Net 3+ [25], and (d) Ours.

segmentation, considering both local and global contexts could be
beneficial. Here, the attention mechanism balances local details with
global context. It showed a significant improvement in the precision
and IOU score of the predicted segmented results, e.g., [17,19,31,32].
However, their significance can fluctuate depending on the application
for which they are designed and the challenges they must overcome.
For example, the local context can preserve adjacent tissues or lesions. It can also reduce the noise reduction of images or help to
discover tiny lesions or tumors [33]. In contrast, the global context
helps alleviate the size and shape restrictions of organs or lesions and
can describe anatomical relationships between organs [34]. This also
considers the variability of medical images. Dai et al. [15] accumulated
local and global contexts for image segmentation in their proposed
’Attentional feature fusion’ mechanism. They incorporate it into the
architecture of ResNet [35], InceptionNet, and FPN [36]. Channel-UNet [32] integrates channel-wise attention within each encoder and
decoder of the U-Net. Create a relational map between the pixels
extracted from channel-wise convolution and the information extracted
from the feature maps, achieving multiscale information fusion. Similarly, SCAU-Net [31] integrates channel-specific spatial attention with
U-Net to amplify local characteristics while eliminating irrelevant ones.
TransAttUnet [17] is a transformer-based segmentation network consisting of Transformer Self-Attention (TSA) and Global Spatial Attention
(GSA), which provides multilevel guided attention. In this research, we
have meticulously analyzed the methods discussed so far and employ
a combination of spatial and channel-wise attentional feature fusion in
multiple layers of our proposed architecture.

work. At the same time, it is essential to understand that high accuracy
does not imply high confidence or certainty about the predicted results.
In addition, uncertainty is crucial when even a slight prediction error
could be hazardous. Therefore, an ideal model should deliver accurate
predictions as well as signal the exigency for augmented scrutiny where
it is uncertain. This is necessary to prevent misdiagnosis [37]. Even
uncertainty estimation has also shown a noticeable impact on image
classification [38–40], etc. Abdar et al. [41] argued that understanding
and quantifying the inherent uncertainty in MIS makes it possible to
ensure reliable prediction and hence achieve the trust of clinicians.
Kohl et al. [42] proposed an approach for segmenting ambiguous
images by integrating the probabilistic approach with the conventional
U-Net model. In addition to providing a singular, deterministic segmentation prediction, this model provides a distribution of potential
segmentation maps for a given input image. Gal and Ghahramani
[43], Kendall and Gal [44], and Postels et al. [38] also outlined
probabilistic approaches to deal with epistemic uncertainty about the
expected results. The ensemble technique has been used extensively for
uncertainty estimation. Here, the prediction depends on the average
of multiple results, which can be related to multiple annotations of
medical images. For instance, for the proper annotation of medical
images, especially ambiguous images, multiple annotations of a single
image are done by multiple experts, and then analyzing the agreement
and disagreement, one can understand which areas are highly uncertain
and which are not. Wenzel et al. [45] proposed an ensemble-based
model for uncertainty estimation by creating various hyperparameter
settings and assessing their variations in prediction. Similarly, the
multidecoder U-Net [46] compares predictions derived from multiple
decoders. Here, the authors utilized dice loss as a similarity metric
and estimated high and low uncertainty in the final output. Using the
ensemble of classifiers [47], Lu et al. [48] assess the uncertainty for
Semi-supervised Medical Image Segmentation. They have developed an

2.3. Uncertainty in MIS
Undeniably, deep learning-based automated segmentation methods provide sophisticated results that ease radiologists’ and clinicians’
3

Information Fusion 115 (2025) 102719

A.A. Munia et al.

of the image. The general structure of the learning process is shown
in Fig. 2. The Encoder Attention Fusion (EAF) module, the Decoder
Attention Fusion module (DAF), and Hierarchical Attention Enhanced
(HAE) skip connections are the main contributions of this network.
Each EAF module takes input from two subsequent encoder layers. On
the other hand, each DAF module takes three inputs: one from the EAF
module output and the other two from its corresponding encoder and
decoder layer. We employ two attention mechanisms: the spatial and
channel attention mechanisms in both the EAF and DAF modules. This
enables the model to capture relevant spatial details and to emphasize
which channels are most relevant to the input image. The spatial
attention mechanism focuses on the most prominent features in spatial
dimensions and captures the global context of the image (broader
contextual information and patterns) [16]. Meanwhile, the channel
attention mechanism focuses on the most significant features between
channels and determines the relationships between different channel
characteristics [16]. Hence, by leveraging both attention mechanisms,
the model can produce a more comprehensive feature representation
for understanding complex structures in medical images. Our proposed
HAE skip connection integrates attention-enhanced features from two
subsequent encoder layers that ensure encapsulation of both local
details and the global context of the image. On the other hand, simple
skip connections transfer fine-grained spatial information directly from
the encoder to the decoder, which helps the model generate more
precise segmentations [11]. The benefit of using HAE and simple skip
connections is that the decoder can have contextual information and
detailed boundaries of intricate structures in medical images. As a
result, AHF-U-Net can produce an accurate and smooth segmentation
map.

uncertainty-informed prototype consistency learning framework called
UPCoL, which considers voxel-level consistency in latent features and
decision space. The uncertainty quantification for each voxel is represented through an entropy-based measure by averaging four prediction
results from four classifiers.
Monte Carlo Dropout approach [43] can also be used to estimate
the uncertainty of a deep learning model. To improve needle placement
accuracy in Point-of-Care Ultrasound (POCUS), Arun et al. [49] propose
a technique called Temporal Monte Carlo dropout. The method reduces
computational complexity by 8x without compromising segmentation
performance, achieving an 84% similarity score to the Monte Carlo
Dropout. To accurately assess MRI-iUS (Intra-operative ultrasound) registration errors for brain tumor surgery, Salari et al. [50] propose a 3D
neural network called FocalErrorNet that is also capable of estimating
uncertainty. The architecture of this focal modulation network includes
two MC dropout layers to the multilayer perceptron (MLP) to facilitate
uncertainty quantification of the results. At test time, 200 regression
samples from MC dropouts were randomly sampled for each MRI-iUS
patch pair. The mean and standard deviation of these samples are
used as the final patch registration error and the uncertainty metric,
respectively.
Sensoy et al. [51] propose an evidential deep learning technique to
measure classification uncertainty employing a Dirichlet distribution on
class probabilities. By using this method, Zou et al. [52] developed a reliable medical image segmentation framework, EvidenceCap, which can
be easily integrated with any backbone network. In their research, they
integrated EvidenceCap with U-Net, AU-Net, and V-Net and showed
noticeable performance improvements on three popular medical image
datasets.
After a thorough analysis of the aforementioned uncertainty quantification techniques, we have implemented MC Dropout, Deep Ensemble, and EvidenceCap methods for our selected datasets. We assessed
their performance both quantitatively, by measuring the Intersection
over Union (IoU) and Dice coefficients for certain pixels versus all
pixels, and qualitatively, through observation of UQ maps. We also
introduced several modifications to the original EvidenceCap method.
Ultimately, we found that our modified EvidenceCap achieved more
sophisticated quantitative and qualitative results compared to the other
two methods. Furthermore, it is a computationally efficient solution
that closely aligns with the requirements of our segmentation model.
Detailed results and analyses are provided in Section 5.

3.2. Encoder Attention Fusion (EAF)
The 𝐸𝐴𝐹 module takes two consecutive encoder outputs as input. In this way, four 𝐸𝐴𝐹 modules have been placed for five encoder layers in the network. For instance, 𝐸𝐴𝐹 (1, 2) integrates input
1 ∈ R𝐶1 ×𝐻1 ×𝑊1 ) and encoder block-2 (𝐹 2 ∈
from encoder block-1 (𝐹𝑒𝑛
𝑒𝑛
1,2
𝐶
×𝐻
×𝑊
2
2
2
R
) that provides an attention-wise fused feature (𝐹ℎ𝑎𝑒
) as output. This integrated output is denoted as 𝐻𝐴𝐸(1, 2) in Fig. 2. Similarly,
𝐸𝐴𝐹 (2, 3), 𝐸𝐴𝐹 (3, 4) and 𝐸𝐴𝐹 (4, 5) follow the same principles and
produce outputs represented by 𝐻𝐴𝐸(2, 3), 𝐻𝐴𝐸(3, 4) and 𝐻𝐴𝐸(4, 5).
Fig. 3 represents a detailed overview of 𝐸𝐴𝐹 (1, 2). Inside this mod∑𝐻 ∑𝑊
1
ule, a global spatial pooling, 𝒈𝒔 (𝑭 ) = 𝐻×𝑊
𝑖=1
𝑗=1 (𝑭 )[∶,𝑖,𝑗] , and a
∑
global channel-wise pooling, 𝒈𝒄 (𝑭 ) = 𝐶1 𝐶
𝑐=1 (𝑭 )[𝑐,∶,∶] are performed
on each feature map. To be more specific, these pooling operations
1 ∈ R𝐶1 ×𝐻1 ×𝑊1 to generate spatial attention weights
are applied to 𝐹𝑒𝑛
(𝒘𝑠 ) and channel attention weights (𝒘𝑐 ). These weights (𝒘𝑠 , 𝒘𝑐 ) are
then multiplied together (𝒘𝑠×𝑐 ) to capture both the global context and
the inter-channel relationships of the features. The same approach is
2 ∈ R𝐶2 ×𝐻2 ×𝑊2 . Moreover, this step can increase the
carried out for 𝐹𝑒𝑛
discriminative power of the model by paying more attention to the
salient features while giving less priority to irrelevant features.
We have performed element-wise addition among these multiplied
features to achieve multiscale feature fusion, 𝐹𝑓 𝑢𝑠𝑒𝑑 . To effectively
perform element-wise addition, feature dimensions must be compatible,
hence we apply transpose convolution (𝑇 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑣) to the features received
from encoder block-2. According to the structure of U-Net, each encoder layer stores features at a different scale. To be more specific,
encoder block-1 captures fine-grained, low-level details. In contrast,
encoder block-2 provides relatively high-level features, followed by encoder block-5, which offers more abstract, high-level features (broader
structures and patterns) [11]. Therefore, combining two consecutive
layers can ensure a more comprehensive representation of features.
This fused feature is then fed into a convolution operation followed
by relu (𝛿) activation to obtain a feature map that preserves the spatial
and channel attention weights. The convolution operation maintains
the same channel and spatial dimensions for input and output. The

3. Methodology
In this section, we show how we designed our AHF-U-Net architecture. First, we discuss the overall architecture and the main components
of the model. Next, we provide the structure and goal of Encoder
Attention Fusion (EAF) and Decoder Attention Fusion (DAF). Following
that, the uncertainty-aware version of AHF-U-Net is explained. We
used different loss functions for AHF-U-Net and uncertainty-aware
AHF-U-Net, as discussed at the end of this section.
3.1. Overview of AHF-U-Net
The proposed AHF-U-Net is an encoder–decoder-based architecture
that employs attention mechanisms on the U-shaped network’s encoder
and decoder sides. We also provide the uncertainty-aware version of
AHF-U-Net to measure the confidence of predicted results. The main
difference between them is that the uncertainty-aware version provides
automatic segmentation of medical images according to their pixelwise semantic label and offers an uncertainty measure of prediction.
Therefore, if the model receives an input image of 𝑿 ∈ R𝐶×𝐻×𝑊 ,
it should produce two outputs: a predicted segmented map and its
corresponding uncertainty map, both with dimensions 𝐻 × 𝑊 . Here, C
represents the color channel in the input layers and the feature channel
in the subsequent layers, while 𝐻 × 𝑊 represents the spatial dimension
4

Information Fusion 115 (2025) 102719

A.A. Munia et al.

Fig. 2. Detailed view of the proposed model.

Fig. 3. Encoder attention fusion block.

advantage of keeping the channel number is increasing network depth
or refining features without Additional Parameters [53]. Furthermore,
the preservation of spatial dimension makes it possible to capture local
spatial patterns, which are essential for segmenting intricate medical
organs [54]. In the last step, we multiply the generated attention
1 ) map so that the 𝐸𝐴𝐹
weights with the encoder block-1 feature (𝐹𝑒𝑛
block can deliver hierarchical attention-enhanced features to its corresponding decoder block. This process can be mathematically described
𝐻
𝑊
as follows (Here, 𝑐2 = 2𝐶1 , 𝐻2 = 21 and 𝑊2 = 21 ):
𝒘1𝑠×𝑐 = 𝑔𝑠 (𝑭 1𝑒𝑛 ) × 𝑔𝑐 (𝑭 1𝑒𝑛 )

(1)

𝒘2𝑠×𝑐 = 𝑔𝑠 (𝑭 2𝑒𝑛 ) × 𝑔𝑐 (𝑭 2𝑒𝑛 )

(2)

𝑭 𝑓 𝑢𝑠𝑒𝑑 = 𝒘1𝑠×𝑐 + 𝑇 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑣(𝒘2𝑠×𝑐 )

(3)

𝑭 1,2
= 𝑭 1𝑒𝑛 × 𝛿(𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑣(𝑭 𝑓 𝑢𝑠𝑒𝑑 ))
ℎ𝑎𝑒

(4)

3.3. Decoder Attention Fusion (DAF)
We include a 𝐷𝐴𝐹 module before every decoder block in the
network, so for four decoders, we position four 𝐷𝐴𝐹 modules. This
way, each decoder layer can get more comprehensive and relevant
information about the image, leading to an enhanced segmentation
map. Here, we propose two different fusion techniques to explore and
compare different strategies for enhancing decoder attention fusion
in the AHF-U-Net model: updated-AFF and CLSCA, both performing
remarkably well.
We developed the Updated AFF (UAFF) architecture to leverage the
established benefits of attentional feature fusion (AFF) proposed by Dai
et al. [15]. The AFF module can fuse features of varying semantics and
scales, making it suitable for common feature fusion scenarios such
as long and short skip connections. By adapting proven frameworks,
we ensure a robust foundation for feature fusion through attention
mechanisms.
5

Information Fusion 115 (2025) 102719

A.A. Munia et al.

Fig. 4. Decoder attention fusion block based on UAFF fusion approach.

Fig. 5. Decoder Attention Fusion Block based on CLSCA fusion approach.

In contrast, the CLSCA module stands for Capturing Local patterns
with Spatial and Channel Attention. It is proposed to investigate the
benefits of incorporating both spatial and channel-wise attention across
different levels of the network. By developing CLSCA, we aim to demonstrate the added value of incorporating dual attention mechanisms that
are specifically crucial for identifying complicated patterns in medical
images. Both modules take the same inputs and follow the same initial
fusion technique.
For instance, Figs. 4 and 5 demonstrate that they take three inputs
and fuse them, such as:

one for capturing local channel context 𝑳(𝑭 𝑡𝑠𝑖 ) and the other for global
channel context 𝑮(𝑭 𝑡𝑠𝑖 ).
(
𝑳(𝑭 𝑡𝑠𝑖 ) = 𝛽 𝑃 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑣𝑖
(5)
( ( (
(
)))))
𝛿 𝛽 𝑃 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑣𝑟 𝑭 𝑡𝑠𝑖
(
𝑮(𝑭 𝑡𝑠𝑖 ) = 𝛽 𝑃 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑣𝑖
(6)
( ( (
( (
))))))
𝛿 𝛽 𝑃 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑣𝑟 𝑔𝑠 𝑭 𝑡𝑠𝑖
where 𝛽 represents Batch Normalization (BN), 𝛿 represents ReLu and
𝒈𝑠 (𝑭 𝑡𝑠𝑖 ) represents global spatial average pooling on feature 𝑭 𝑡𝑠𝑖 . All the
convolutions used in these two branches are point-wise convolutions
(𝑃 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑣 : kernel size 1 × 1) where 𝑃 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑣𝑟 reduces the channels from
𝐶 to 𝐶∕𝑟 and 𝑃 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑣𝑖 increases the channel from 𝐶∕𝑟 to 𝐶 (r =
reduction ratio). The attention weight 𝑾 is obtained by performing a
broadcasting addition (⊕) of 𝑳(𝑭 𝑡𝑠𝑖 ) and 𝑮(𝑭 𝑡𝑠𝑖 ) and passing the result
through Sigmoid activation (𝜎) to scale it between 0 and 1.
(
)
𝑾 (𝑭 𝑡𝑠𝑖 ) = 𝜎 𝐿(𝑭 𝑡𝑠𝑖 ) ⊕ 𝐺(𝑭 𝑡𝑠𝑖 )
(7)

• Features from the corresponding encoder layer, 𝑭 𝑒𝑛
• Hierarchical Attention-Enhanced features from the corresponding
EAF module, 𝑭 ℎ𝑎𝑒
• Upsampled decoder features from the previous decoder layer, 𝑭 𝑑𝑒
𝑭 𝒕𝒔𝒊 = 𝑭 𝒆𝒏 + 𝑭 𝒉𝒂𝒆 + 𝑭 𝒅𝒆
The combination of these three features produces a new part that
captures local details (from encoder features), global context (from
attention-enhanced elements), and spatial information (from upsampled decoder features) of the relevant image. This extensive feature
is denoted as the Triple-Stream Integrated (TSI) feature, which is
designated as 𝐹𝑡𝑠𝑖 in Figs. 4 and 5. However, the rest of the steps of
UAFF and CLSCA are different and will be discussed in the following
two subsections.

A feature recalibration is done by multiplying 𝑾 (𝑭 𝑡𝑠𝑖 ) with the HAE
feature (𝑭 ℎ𝑎𝑒 ) and (1 − 𝑾 (𝑭 𝑡𝑠𝑖 )) with the upsampled decoder features
(𝑭 𝑑𝑒 ). Combining these features completes the final fusion of UAFF, and
a final refined feature is prepared to feed the corresponding decoder.
𝑭 uaff = 𝑊 (𝑭 𝑡𝑠𝑖 ) × 𝑭 ℎ𝑎𝑒
⊕ (1 − 𝑊 (𝑭 𝑡𝑠𝑖 )) × 𝑭 𝑑𝑒

3.3.1. Overview of UAFF
Fig. 4 shows a complete overview of the UAFF-based DAF module.
For simplicity, let us consider it the DAF-1 module within the AHF-UNet network. The UAFF takes three feature maps as input (discussed in
Section 3.3) and performs element-wise addition among them, unlike
AFF, which takes two feature maps as input. After this initial integration, the TSI feature is generated and passed through two branches:

(8)

3.3.2. Overview of CLSCA
Fig. 5 shows a complete overview of the CLSCA-based DAF module.
For simplicity, consider the DAF-1 module, which is placed between
Decoder blocks 1 and 2 in the original network Fig. 2. In CLSCA, the
initial integration technique and input features are the same as in UAFF.
However, here, we use three branches to focus on features in different
6

Information Fusion 115 (2025) 102719

A.A. Munia et al.

aspects instead of the two used in the UAFF. The purpose of these
branches is discussed below:
(
(
))
𝑳𝑫(𝑭 𝑡𝑠𝑖 ) = 𝛿 Conv 𝑭 𝑡𝑠𝑖 × 𝑭 𝑡𝑠𝑖
(9)

𝑏𝑐(𝑖,𝑗) =

The branch ‘SA’ signifies Spatial Average pooling, which applies global
average pooling along the spatial dimension (𝒈𝒔 ) of TSI features, and
the result is fed into a convolution and ReLU activation to generate a
channel-wise attention map. After that, an element-wise multiplication
is done between this channel-wise attention map and the original TSI
features, which provides channel-weighted features.
)))
(
( (
× 𝑭 𝑡𝑠𝑖
(11)
𝑪𝑨(𝑭 𝑡𝑠𝑖 ) = 𝛿 Conv 𝑔𝑐 𝑭 𝑡𝑠𝑖

𝐿𝐵𝐶 = −

𝑏𝑐 = 1, where 𝑢 ≥ 0, and 𝑏𝑐 ≥ 0 ∀ 𝑐 = 1, 2, … , 𝐶

(17)

(18)

]
+(1 − 𝑌𝑖,𝑗 ) log(1 − 𝜎(𝑌̂𝑖,𝑗 )) ,

(13)

where 𝐻 and 𝑊 represent the image’s height and width, 𝑌𝑖,𝑗 denotes
the ground truth label at the (𝑖, 𝑗)-th pixel, 𝑌̂𝑖,𝑗 denotes the predicted
logit at the (𝑖, 𝑗)-th pixel and 𝜎 is the sigmoid activation function.
EvidenceCap proposed a loss function to calibrate uncertainty in
3D medical images. Following that, we modified it for our 2D image
segmentation.
∑
𝐿𝑈 = − 𝛽𝑡
𝑝𝑖𝑗 log(1 − 𝑢𝑖𝑗 )
𝑖,𝑗∈{𝑦̂𝑖𝑗 =𝑦𝑖𝑗 }

− (1 − 𝛽𝑡 )

∑

(1 − 𝑝𝑖𝑗 ) log(𝑢𝑖𝑗 )

(19)

𝑖,𝑗∈{𝑦̂𝑖𝑗 ≠𝑦𝑖𝑗 }

where, 𝑦̂𝑖𝑗 and 𝑦𝑖𝑗 is the predicted label and true label at the (𝑖, 𝑗)-th
pixel, respectively; 𝑝𝑖𝑗 represents the confidence of the prediction at
the (𝑖, 𝑗)-th pixel, while 𝑢𝑖𝑗 is the uncertainty for the same pixel. 𝛽𝑡
works as an annealing factor where 𝛽𝑡 = 𝛽0 𝑒−(ln 𝛽0 ∕𝑇 )𝑡 and 𝑇 and t are
the total number of epochs and the current epoch, respectively. The
purpose of using an annealing factor here is to dynamically adjust the
optimization process, which leads to better model generalization and
convergence [58].
Finally, to make an uncertainty-aware segmentation model, we
combine the uncertainty loss (𝐿𝑈 ) function and segmentation loss function (𝐿𝐵𝐶 ) and train the model with this combined loss function (𝐿𝐶 ).
So, the two uncertainty-aware versions of AHF-U-Net, UA-AHF-U-NET
(UAFF) and UA-AHF-U-NET (CLSCA), are trained with the following
loss function:
𝐿𝐶 = 𝐿𝐵𝐶 + 𝐿𝑈

(14)

𝑐=1

(20)

4. Experiment

For a particular class 𝑐, its associated belief mass 𝑏𝑐 is determined
∑
from its evidence 𝑒𝑐 and the total evidence 𝑆, where 𝑆 = 𝐶
𝑖=1 (𝑒𝑖 + 1).
Similarly, the general uncertainty of a prediction can be calculated by
dividing the total number of classes by the total evidence.

4.1. Experimental dataset
To evaluate the effectiveness of our proposed AHF-U-Net in conditions of low resolution and unclear edge definition, we performed
experiments on breast tumor segmentation and skin lesion segmentation. For breast tumor segmentation, we use the breast ultrasound
image dataset [22]. For skin lesion segmentation, we use the dataset
proposed by the International Skin Imaging Collaboration (ISIC) in
2016 [23] and 2017 [24] (see Fig. 7). Although the core task of
both challenges includes automated skin lesion segmentation from
dermoscopic images, ISIC-2017 includes a larger and more structured

𝑒
𝐶
𝑏𝑐 = 𝑐 and 𝑢 =
(15)
𝑆
𝑆
Here, we modify Eqs. (14) and (15) specifically for image segmentation,
where each pixel (𝑖, 𝑗) of an image (𝑋) can be classified into a frame of
C mutually exclusive classes.
𝑢(𝑖,𝑗) +

𝐻 ∑
𝑊
∑
1
𝐻 × 𝑊 𝑖=1 𝑗=1

[
𝑌𝑖,𝑗 log(𝜎(𝑌̂𝑖,𝑗 ))

The UA-AHF-U-Net is an uncertainty-sensitive version of AHF-UNet, measuring the uncertainty in the predicted segmentation mask.
The idea we use to measure segmentation uncertainty is similar to EvidenceCap [52], which can easily integrate with any backbone network.
EvidenceCap uses the Dempster–Shafer Theory of Evidence (DST) [55]
to evaluate uncertainty. DST provides predicted probabilities and ’belief
masses’ for subsets of a ’frame of discernment.’ The term ’frame of
discernment’ refers to all possible states or outcomes. Assigning a high
belief mass to a subset, a low belief mass to others, or even the same
belief mass to all the subsets is possible. When the same belief mass is
assigned to all subsets, it could be interpreted as ‘‘I’m unsure about the
prediction’’. This belief mass is presented formally through Subjective
Logic (SL) [56]. Using the Dirichlet distribution, SL provides a way
to quantify belief mass and uncertainty based on evidence. Dirichlet
distributions generalize Beta distributions, capable of capturing uncertainty in multinomial distributions [57]. For example, consider that SL
provides a belief mass 𝑏𝑐 to each frame of mutually exclusive outcome
𝐶 (𝐶 is similar to pixel labels or class labels in segmentation problem,
𝑐 = 1, 2, … , 𝐶) and an overall uncertainty mass 𝑢; here all values are
positive and their sum is equal to one.
𝐶
∑

𝐶
,
𝑆

We use two different loss functions for the end-to-end training of our
proposed models. First, we train AHF-U-NET (UAFF) and AHF-U-NET
(CLSCA) using the Binary Cross Entropy with Logits loss function (BCEwithLogits). This loss function combines Sigmoid activation and Binary
Cross Entropy loss function; hence, the input should be the model’s raw
output. Eq. (18) shows the formula for calculating BCEwithLogits loss
for the segmentation problem:

3.4. Uncertainty-aware AHF-U-Net (UA-AHF-U-Net)

𝑢+

𝑢(𝑖,𝑗) =

3.5. Loss function

The branch ‘CA’ denotes Channel Average pooling, which applies global
average pooling along the channel dimension (𝒈𝒔 ), which generates
spatial-wise attention features. Combining these enhanced features offers an attention-enhanced feature map that captures both the local
details and global information (spatially and channel-wise).
(
𝑾 (𝑭 𝑡𝑠𝑖 ) = 𝜎 𝐿𝐷(𝑭 𝑡𝑠𝑖 )
(12)
)
+𝑆𝐴(𝑭 𝑡𝑠𝑖 ) + 𝐶𝐴(𝑭 𝑡𝑠𝑖 )
+ (1 − 𝑊 (𝑭 𝑡𝑠𝑖 )) × 𝑭 𝑑𝑒

and

where 𝑢(𝑖,𝑗) ≥ 0 and 𝑏𝑐(𝑖,𝑗) ≥ 0 for 𝑐 = 1, … , 𝐶. In the context of
image segmentation, 𝑒𝑐(𝑖,𝑗) represents the evidence derived for the 𝑐th
represents the belief mass for that class
class at pixel (𝑖, 𝑗), and 𝑏(𝑖,𝑗)
𝑐
at pixel (𝑖, 𝑗). The uncertainty mass 𝑢(𝑖,𝑗) quantifies the uncertainty of
the classification at that pixel, providing a measure of confidence in
the predicted class label and 𝑆 is the total evidence calculated with
∑
(𝑖,𝑗)
+ 1).
𝑆= 𝐶
𝑐=1 (𝑒𝑐

The branch ‘LD’ stands for ‘Local Details’, which captures immediate
local details of the TSI feature.
(
( (
)))
𝑺𝑨(𝑭 𝑡𝑠𝑖 ) = 𝛿 Conv 𝑔𝑠 𝑭 𝑡𝑠𝑖
× 𝑭 𝑡𝑠𝑖
(10)

𝑭 clsca = 𝑊 (𝑭 𝑡𝑠𝑖 ) × 𝑭 ℎ𝑎𝑒

𝑒𝑐(𝑖,𝑗)
𝑆

𝐶
∑

𝑏(𝑖,𝑗)
=1
𝑐

(16)

𝑐=1

7

Information Fusion 115 (2025) 102719

A.A. Munia et al.

Fig. 6. Mask conversion: (a) The image contains a single tumor, and the dataset provided a single mask for that, so no conversion is needed. (b) The image contains two tumors,
and the dataset provided two individual masks for two tumors, so conversion is needed to combine them into one.

dataset with real-time feedback mechanisms. Hence, we utilize both to
enhance the robustness and generalizability of our model through more
comprehensive training and testing.

4.2. Evaluation metrics
The two most common metrics used for the image segmentation
algorithm are the mean Intersection over Union (IoU) and the mean
DICE coefficient (DICE) [61]. We use these two metrics as our key
evaluation metrics to evaluate the quantitative performance of our
proposed model. Although IoU and DICE both measure the overlap
between the predicted segmented mask and the ground truth mask, the
DICE score is more effective in the case where class imbalance may
affect the output [62,63]. The images we use to train and test the proposed model are mostly covered with background pixels. Therefore, the
use of a DICE score is appropriate. In addition, we measure pixel-wise
accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity to evaluate our model.

(1) Breast Ultrasound Dataset (BUS): The data presented in the
breast ultrasound image dataset is collected from 600 female patients
aged 25 to 75. Initially, 1100 images were gathered, but after preprocessing and removing duplicate images, 780 images were finalized for
the BUS dataset. They have categorized all images into three classes:
normal, benign, and malignant, and also provide ground truth masks of
each image. The number of ground truth masks for each image depends
on the number of tumors. For example, if the image contains one tumor,
one mask is provided, and if the image has three tumors, three masks
are provided. We performed the following preprocessing steps to train
our network on this dataset: The images marked as ‘normal’ do not
have tumors, hence nothing to segment, as this research focuses mainly
on image segmentation, we eliminated all these images and masks.
Since the images come in different shapes, we had to resize them all
to 240 × 240. We need only one output mask corresponding to a single
input image to ensure a straightforward training process. Therefore,
we combined multiple covers into one following the same approach
as shown in the research proposed by Munia et al. [59]. Fig. 6 shows
a complete process overview.

4.3. Variations of the proposed model
We have compared four versions of the proposed AHF-U-Net with
other state-of-the-art models. According to the fusion strategy of the
decoder side, we have created two variations: one is based on UAFF,
and the other is based on CLSCA. To measure the uncertainty of the
predicted result and provide a corresponding uncertainty map with the
predicted segmented map, we have trained the two versions of AHFU-Net (UAFF and CLSCA) with an uncertainty-aware loss function and
got two Uncertainty-Aware versions. Thus, we have the following four
versions:

(2) ISIC-2016: The International Skin Imaging Collaboration (ISIC)
presents the challenge of contributing to the analysis of skin cancer
(Melanoma) from dermoscopic images. Dermoscopy is a noninvasive
imaging technique beneficial for early detection of skin cancer [60].
This challenge was first announced in 2016 and divided into three
subchallenges: segmentation of the melanoma lesion, four types of
characteristic detection, and three types of disease classification [23].
ISIC-2016 provides 900 train images and 379 test images and supplies the corresponding ground-truth mask generated by dermoscopic
experts.

• AHF-U-Net (UAFF)
• AHF-U-Net (CLSCA)
• UA-AHF-U-NET (UAFF)
• UA-AHF-U-NET (CLSCA)
4.4. Comparative models
The architecture of AHF-U-Net features a U-shaped architecture
that integrates attention-guided and multiscale/hierarchical fusion approaches on both the encoder and decoder sides. To ensure a fair comparison, we carefully considered these features when selecting other
models for evaluation. We examined eleven state-of-the-art models,
assessing both their quantitative and qualitative performance. These
models are categorized into three major groups and distinguished by
different colors in all evaluation tables.
As U-Net [11] is foundational in medical image segmentation and
our model employs similar downsampling and upsampling processes,

(3) ISIC-2017: The data found in ISIC-2017 are an expanded version
of ISIC-2016. This is the second challenge of ISIC [24] for detecting
melanoma from dermoscopic images, which also divides the challenge
into three subchallenges like ISIC-2016. Here, the amount of data is
significantly higher than in the previous challenge. It includes 2750
dermoscopic images: 2000 for training, 150 for validation, and 600 for
testing. All images come with their corresponding binary masks annotated by dermatological experts, where the pixel value 255 represents
the injury’s area and the pixel value 0 represents the background.
8

Information Fusion 115 (2025) 102719

A.A. Munia et al.

Fig. 7. Dermoscopic images of skin lesions and corresponding masks (a) The images and masks from ISIC-2016 [23]. (b) Images and masks from ISIC-2017 [24].

we included it in our evaluation. SegNet [14], another typical architecture for image segmentation like U-Net (Ronneberger et al. 2015),
was also selected for comparison. Models such as U-Net++ [12], UNext [64], CUNet [26], and CANet [65] were chosen due to their
use of multiscale skip connections and varied connectivity patterns
between encoders and decoders. Additionally, we selected models like
AFF [15] and iAFF [15], which emphasize attention guidance, as well
as TransUnet [66] and SwinUnet [67], which are based on transformer
technology.

Optuna finds Adam to be the most efficient optimizer, with the best
initial learning rate of 2.0 × 10−4 for the BUSI dataset and 1.0 × 10−5 for
the ISIC-16 and ISIC-17 datasets.
We train the model for 100 epochs and set the batch size to 8.
During training, we monitor the model’s performance on the validation
dataset after every epoch. At the beginning, we set the maximum IoU
validation to 0 and continuously updated it with the highest value
that was provided by the model at the latest time. An early stopping
mechanism can terminate training if this value has not been updated
for 20 epochs. The final model saves the weights at the point where the
best IoU validation score is achieved.

4.5. Implementation details

5. Results and discussion

We have implemented the code in PyTorch [68] and run it in
Google Colab-Pro [69], utilizing NVIDIA T4 GPU in our experiments.
All the datasets we examined for this research are split into training,
validation, and test sets. All images are resized to 240 × 240 pixels to
feed our proposed model and other models used for evaluation to make
a fair comparison.
We utilized various data augmentation techniques in the training
dataset to improve the model’s robustness and reduce overfitting. For
instance, for random rotations, translations, scaling, and shearing we
apply RandomAffine, for randomly zooming into images RandomZoom
is applied, and to introduce variation in image orientation we utilize
RandomHorizontalFlip and RandomVerticalFlip. To maintain consistency in the input images, we use ResizeTransform in both the training
and validation sets.
To find which optimizer and set of hyperparameters best fit our
model, we employ a hyperparameter optimization framework called
Optuna. It automates the process of searching for the most suitable
hyperparameters by analyzing predefined ranges of values. In order
to find optimal solutions, it uses a Bayesian optimization technique to
narrow down the search space over successive trials [70].
The core of Optuna’s optimization process is the objective function,
which can be designed for maximization or minimization, depending
on the model’s requirements. For our segmentation model, we have
configured the objective function to maximize the value of the IoU
metric. To improve model performance, Optuna executes this function
in each trial with a new set of hyperparameters, which are adjusted
based on the outcomes from previous trials. We provided three options
for the optimizer: Adam, RMSprop, and SGD, and tested extensive
ranges for hyperparameters such as learning rate (from 2 × 10−5 to
1×10−2 ), weight decay (from 2×10−5 to 1×10−2 ), and dropout rate (from
0.0 to 0.5). Recognizing that the learning rate can significantly affect
the model’s ability to fine-tune its parameters, we set the learning rate
scheduler parameters to range from 1 to 10 and established a gamma
value range from 0.1 to 1.0.
While Optuna facilitates the search for optimal hyperparameters, it
is important to note that the process can be time-consuming due to the
number of trials and the comprehensive testing of each parameter set.
Nevertheless, this thorough search process is crucial, as it significantly
contributes to the accuracy and robustness of the final model. In this
study we created an Optuna study with 60 trials. For all three datasets,

5.1. Evaluation on breast ultrasound data
Table 1 shows the quantitative results for five evaluation metrics,
where red text represents the highest score and green represents the
second-highest score. Both versions of AHF-U-Net outperform other
state-of-the-art methods concerning the main evaluation metrics (IoU
and DICE), among which we benchmark AHF-U-Net (CLSCA) for the
BUS dataset. Among the eleven methods we evaluated for this experiment, SwinUnet [67] achieved the highest overall performance across
most metrics. However, AHF-UNET (CLSCA) provides approximately
1.2% better IoU (70.12%) and 1.9% better DICE score (82.43%) compared to SwinUnet. In terms of the other three evaluation metrics, AHFU-Net (CLSCA) offers the highest accuracy (96.63%), U-Net-iAFF [15]
provides the highest sensitivity (83.40%) and Unext [64] provides the
highest specificity. Fig. 8 shows the predicted segmented mask of our
proposed methods, as well as a few other methods for breast ultrasound
images.
Table 2 shows the quantitative results of the uncertainty-aware
versions of the proposed models: UA-AHF-U-Net (UAFF) and UA-AHFU-Net (CLSCA). To ensure a fair comparison, we needed a model
that uses the same uncertainty measurement technique we employed.
As Zou et al. [52] already integrated EvidenceCap with U-Net, we also
integrated our modified version of EvidenceCap with U-Net and UNet++. These models were selected due to their popularity in image
segmentation, despite their performance not being optimal for our
datasets. Additionally, to compare with an attention-based method,
we integrated EvidenceCap with U-NetAFF. By doing so, we selected
three models from the three major groups into which we divided
all the evaluation models. The Table 2 shows that the uncertaintyaware versions perform slightly better than their baselines. However,
both UA-AHF-UNet models outperform the other uncertainty-aware
models. Specifically, UA-AHF-UNet (CLSCA) leads in IoU (70.33%),
Dice score (82.51%), Accuracy (96.89%), and Specificity (98.60%) by
0.21%, 0.08%, 0.26%, and 0.22% respectively, compared to AHF-UNet
(CLSCA).
Fig. 9 represents the qualitative results of this experiment showing
predicted segmentation with uncertainty maps for each algorithm.
We include only one UA-AHF-U-Net’s output for qualitative analysis
9

Information Fusion 115 (2025) 102719

A.A. Munia et al.

Table 1
This table represents the quantitative results of our proposed models with other state-of-the-art models for the BUS dataset [22], where red
denotes the highest score and green denotes the second highest. We trained and evaluated all the models in identical settings to ensure a fair
and unbiased comparison. To be more specific, image size, batch size, learning rate, number of epochs, and a few other hyperparameters are
kept the same for all models.
Methods

IoU

Dice

Accuracy

Sensitivity

Specificity

U-Net [11]
SegNet [14]
U-Net++ [12]
Unext [64]
CUNet [26]
CA-Net [65]
U-NetAFF [15]
U-Net-iAFF [15]
TransUnet [66]
SwinUnet [67]
DCSAU [71]
AHF-UNet (UAFF)
AHF-UNet (CLSCA)

64.61
58.95
65.37
67.42
52.78
66.34
65.03
66.32
66.15
68.92
58.77
69.42
70.12

78.50
65.57
79.06
80.59
59.78
79.77
78.81
79.75
76.71
80.53
74.03
81.95
82.43

96.34
82.13
96.07
95.92
89.72
96.54
95.85
95.88
93.46
96.43
94.88
96.49
96.63

73.86
69.44
76.21
80.95
72.52
78.67
79.29
83.40
75.87
81.71
75.10
82.01
81.91

97.57
93.35
97.91
98.80
95.02
98.64
97.64
97.23
95.72
98.11
97.01
98.05
98.38

Fig. 8. Qualitative results of different models for breast ultrasound images collected from the BUS dataset [22].

differs significantly from the mask predicted in this image. This area is
highlighted in red, indicating that radiologists should double-check it.

Table 2
Comparison of our proposed uncertainty-aware models with the uncertainty-aware
versions of three other models (U-Net, U-Net++, and UNetAFF) from three major groups
for the BUS dataset [22].
Methods

IoU

Dice

Acc

Sens

Spec

UA-UNet
UA-U-Net++
UA-U-NetAFF
UA-AHF-UNet (UAFF)
UA-AHF-UNet (CLSCA)

65.33
65.84
68.84
69.81
70.33

79.03
80.60
81.24
82.22
82.51

96.26
96.81
95.98
96.53
96.89

77.91
77.94
81.83
82.62
80.34

98.08
97.91
97.72
98.03
98.60

5.2. Evaluation on ISIC-16
We also evaluated the performance of AHF-U-Net (UAFF) and AHFU-Net (CLSCA) for the skin lesion segmentation task hosted by the
International Skin Imaging Collaboration (ISIC), 2016. Table 3 presents
the quantitative results of our model compared to other state-of-the-art
models, and the qualitative results are provided in Fig. 10.
From Table 3, it is noticeable that the methods (methods in rows 3
to 6) that use multiscale skip connections or aggregate multilevel context information are better (except CU-Net) than the methods that use
simple skip connections (U-Net and SegNet). In addition, integrating
attention mechanisms into image segmentation leads to enhanced segmentation performance. We have implemented three attention-guided
approaches: U-Net-AFF, U-Net-iAFF, and DCSAU, and two advanced
transformer-based approaches (TransUnet and SwinUnet) and compared their performance on ISIC-2016.
Generally, these methods perform well. Among them, U-Net-iAFF
provides the highest IoU (83. 75%), DICE (91. 15%), and sensitivity

because of similar qualitative results between the two UA-AHF-U-Nets.
Within the uncertainty map, there are areas represented in dark blue
when the ground truth mask matches the predicted mask, and red when
the ground truth mask does not match the predicted mask. Hence, the
dark blue color indicates low uncertainty or high confidence, while the
red color indicates high uncertainty or low confidence. For a clearer
explanation, let us analyze the output of U-Net++ for the second
image (2nd row) in Fig. 2. A particular area of the ground truth mask
10

Information Fusion 115 (2025) 102719

A.A. Munia et al.

Fig. 9. Predicted segmentation map and corresponding uncertainty map (U Map) generated from uncertainty-aware models for breast ultrasound images collected from the BUS
dataset [22].
Table 3
This table represents the quantitative results of our proposed models with other state-of-the-art models for the ISIC-2016 dataset [23], where red
denotes the highest score and green denotes the second highest. We trained and evaluated all the models in identical settings to ensure a fair
and unbiased comparison. To be more specific, the image size, batch size, learning rate, number of epochs, and a few other hyperparameters
are kept the same for all models.
Methods

IoU

Dice

Accuracy

Sensitivity

Specificity

U-Net [11]
SegNet [14]
U-Net++ [12]
Unext [64]
CUNet [26]
CA-Net [65]
U-NetAFF [15]
U-Net-iAFF [15]
TransUnet [66]
SwinUnet [67]
DCSAU [71]
AHF-UNet (UAFF)
AHF-UNet (CLSCA)

81.27
79.67
81.46
81.89
80.67
82.30
83.01
83.75
79.56
82.88
82.21
83.31
83.16

89.67
85.29
89.78
89.91
87.51
90.29
90.53
91.15
90.15
90.03
90.23
90.89
90.69

94.36
89.66
94.74
94.36
93.68
94.72
95.03
95.10
92.44
94.58
94.74
95.43
95.06

88.82
87.53
87.78
87.19
86.01
89.25
88.88
91.72
82.79
89.98
88.28
91.64
91.42

96.47
90.51
97.11
97.02
95.54
96.68
97.16
96.38
94.91
96.71
97.19
98.31
96.36

5.3. Evaluation on ISIC-17
Table 4
Comparison of our proposed uncertainty-aware models with the uncertainty-aware
versions of three other models (U-Net, U-Net++, and UNetAFF) from three major groups
for the ISIC-16 dataset [23].
Methods

IoU

Dice

Acc

Sens

Spec

UA-UNet
UA-U-Net++
UA-U-NetAFF
UA-AHF-UNet (UAFF)
UA-AHF-UNet (CLSCA)

81.84
80.90
82.42
83.68
83.02

90.01
89.44
90.36
91.19
90.76

94.53
94.61
95.02
95.46
95.27

89.50
86.73
88.82
91.69
91.49

96.44
97.43
97.23
97.80
97.97

AHF-U-Net (UAFF) and AHF-U-Net (CLSCA) also performed well on
the skin lesion segmentation task hosted by the International Skin Imaging Collaboration (ISIC) in 2017. Table 5 summarizes the quantitative
results of our proposed models compared to other mainstream models,
while Fig. 12 presents the qualitative results of this experiment.
We first implemented U-Net and SegNet, the most common and
widely used image segmentation architectures for evaluation. U-Net
(IoU = 81.48% and DICE = 89. 79%) performs much better than SegNet
(IoU = 79.86% and DICE = 86.78%) in all evaluation metrics. Next, we
implemented a few methods that fused multiscale context information:
U-Net++, Unext, CU-Net, and CA-Net. Most of these methods provide
approximately 82% IoU and better segmentation results than the previous two methods. The exception occurs for CU-Net, whose performance
is relatively low for ISIC-2016 and ISIC-2017. However, attentionguided models and transformer-based models outperform the above
techniques for the ISIC-2017 dataset. DCSAU gives the highest IoU
(83.49%) and DICE (91.21%) among the eleven standard methods we
use for evaluation. Combining the features of attention mechanism and
multiscale fusion, both AHF-U-Net (UAFF and CLSCA) versions perform
better than DCSAU. Finally, we benchmarked AHF-U-Net (UAFF) for
skin lesion segmentation (ISIC-2017) to provide the highest IoU (84.
6%), DICE (91. 66%) and precision (97. 02%).
Table 6 compares the proposed uncertainty-aware version of our
model with the uncertainty-aware versions of U-Net, U-Net++, and
U-NetAFF. For ISIC-17, our implemented uncertainty-aware versions

(91. 72%). However, both of our models perform reasonably well;
AHF-U-Net (UAFF) achieved the second-highest score in terms of IoU
(83.31%), DICE(90.89%), and sensitivity (91.64%) and the highest
score in terms of accuracy (95.43%) and specificity (98.31%). We
used our proposed attention-aware versions of AHF-U-Net to measure
the uncertainty of predicted skin lesion segmentation. Fig. 11 shows
the predicted segmentation maps with the corresponding uncertainty
maps generated from our model and the uncertainty-aware versions
of U-Net and U-Net++. The quantitative results of this experiment are
shown in Table 4, where UA-AHF-U-NET (UAFF) outperforms others
in all evaluation metrics. Although we benchmarked U-Net-iAFF for
ISIC-2016 according to Table 3, our proposed UA-AHF-U-NET (UAFF)
provides 0.04%, 0.36%, and 1.42% higher values for DICE (91.19%),
accuracy (95.46%), and specificity (97.8%).
11

Information Fusion 115 (2025) 102719

A.A. Munia et al.

Fig. 10. Qualitative results of different models for skin lesion segmentation collected from the ISIC-2016 dataset [23].

Fig. 11. Predicted segmentation map and corresponding uncertainty map (U-Map) generated from uncertainty-aware models for skin lesion images collected from the ISIC-2016
dataset [23].

of U-Net, U-Net++ and U-NetAFF outperform their original versions.
However, two uncertainty-aware versions of our proposed model do not
show any improvement compared to their baseline models. In terms of
uncertainty-awareness, UA-AHF-U-NET (UAFF) is the best of these five
models. Fig. 13 shows the qualitative results of these methods.

0.6, to implement in our test set. For each threshold, we computed
the Intersection over Union (IoU) and Dice scores for all pixels as
well as pixels whose uncertainty scores are less than those thresholds
only. As expected, separating out certain pixels based on measured
uncertainty resulted in higher IoU and Dice scores compared to using all
pixels. Table 7 presents the quantitative results for all UQ techniques,
contrasting performances for certain pixels versus all pixels within the
BUS dataset. Our modified EvidenceCap consistently showed higher
IoU and Dice scores for certain pixels for all thresholds compared to
the IoU(80%) and Dice(89%) given by all pixels. However, with the
threshold of 0.4 yielded the best results (IoU = 96%, Dice = 98%).
In contrast, neither MC Dropout nor Deep Ensemble showed improved
performance for certain pixels compared to all pixels.
As uncertainty maps provide an intuitive understanding of where
the model is most and least certain about its predictions, we analyzed different uncertainty maps generated by various uncertainty

5.4. Evaluation of different uncertainty quantification (UQ) methods
We conducted a quantitative analysis of MC Dropout, Deep Ensemble, and EvidenceCap to determine which technique is most effective
in our context. Different uncertainty quantification methods can yield
varied values to represent uncertainty. To understand these variations,
we plotted histograms of the uncertainty values of all the pixels for
different methods. This analysis revealed that a single uncertainty
threshold does not suffice to compare all methods comprehensively.
Consequently, we chose three uncertainty thresholds: 0.4, 0.5, and
12

Information Fusion 115 (2025) 102719

A.A. Munia et al.

Table 5
This table represents the quantitative results of our proposed models with other state-of-the-art models for the ISIC-2017 dataset [24], where
red denotes the highest score and green denotes the second highest. We trained and evaluated all the models in identical settings to ensure a
fair and unbiased comparison. To be more specific, image size, batch size, learning rate, number of epochs, and a few other hyperparameters
are kept the same for all models.
Methods

IoU

Dice

Accuracy

Sensitivity

Specificity

U-Net [11]
SegNet [14]
U-Net++ [12]
Unext [64]
CUNet [26]
CA-Net [65]
U-NetAFF [15]
U-Net-iAFF [15]
TransUnet [66]
SwinUnet [67]
DCSAU [71]
AHF-UNet (UAFF)
AHF-UNet (CLSCA)

81.48
79.86
82.05
82.93
80.95
82.70
82.97
83.07
79.42
80.76
83.49
84.6
84.4

89.79
86.78
90.38
90.85
88.35
90.53
88.69
90.75
81.29
91.01
91.21
91.66
91.54

96.23
88.86
96.28
95.91
95.12
96.45
96.61
94.82
92.02
96.14
96.57
97.02
96.92

87.93
86.29
88.07
88.95
87.74
88.41
87.52
92.36
82.91
91.36
87.56
88.46
89.25

98.16
92.01
98.15
98.62
96.83
97.92
98.73
95.75
95.86
97.39
97.95
98.95
98.68

Fig. 12. Qualitative results of different models for skin lesion segmentation collected from the ISIC-2017 dataset [24].
Table 6
Comparison of our proposed uncertainty-aware models with the uncertainty-aware
versions of three other models (U-Net, U-Net++, and UNetAFF) from three major groups
for the ISIC-2017 dataset [24].
Methods

IoU

Dice

Acc

Sens

Spec

UA-UNet
UA-U-Net++
UA-U-NetAFF
UA-AHF-UNet (UAFF)
UA-AHF-UNet (CLSCA)

82.52
82.24
83.04
84.32
84.01

90.43
90.44
90.73
91.49
90.96

96.55
96.39
96.56
96.93
96.72

87.98
88.14
87.98
88.47
88.19

98.66
98.98
98.59
98.94
98.69

Fig. 14 presents three uncertainty maps produced by EvidenceCap,
MC Dropout, and Deep Ensemble for the BUS dataset. Upon close
examination, it is evident that the ground truth and predictions are
closely aligned, suggesting the model’s predictions are mostly correct,
with only some inconsistency around the borders. Our UQ technique,
EvidenceCap, uniquely highlights these areas in green, indicating regions where radiologists should focus more attention. In contrast, the
UQ maps from MC Dropout and Deep Ensemble show significant areas of high uncertainty (marked in red) even for correctly classified
pixels, which could potentially mislead radiologists. After analyzing
both quantitative and qualitative results, we have chosen to implement
EvidenceCap for our experiments due to its more accurate and relevant
uncertainty visualization.

quantification techniques for the same inputs 14. For these maps, we
employed the ‘‘jet’’ color map, where blue represents areas of low
uncertainty—indicating high model confidence. Conversely, red signifies high uncertainty, marking regions where the model’s confidence
is low. Green or yellow colors denote moderate uncertainty, typically
appearing in transition zones that highlight areas where the model
begins to question its predictions, possibly due to gradients changes in
the features being examined.

5.5. Statistical validation of the proposed model
In this research, we extensively evaluated the performance of our
proposed segmentation models, AHF-U-Net (UAFF) and AHF-U-Net
(CLSCA), across three datasets: BUS, ISIC-16, and ISIC-17. The comparison included 11 other established models. Our models achieved the
13

Information Fusion 115 (2025) 102719

A.A. Munia et al.

Fig. 13. Predicted segmentation map and corresponding uncertainty map (U-Map) generated by uncertainty-aware models for skin lesion images collected from the ISIC-2017
dataset [24].
Table 7
Quantitative comparison of uncertainty quantification techniques.
Uncertainty
Threshold

Pixel Type

EvidenceCap IoU
(%)

EvidenceCap
Dice (%)

MC Dropout IoU
(%)

MC Dropout
Dice (%)

Deep Ensemble
IoU (%)

Deep Ensemble
Dice (%)

N/A
0.4
0.5
0.6

All pixels
Certain pixels
Certain pixels
Certain pixels

80.89
96.26
91.15
86.95

89.44
98.12
95.37
93.02

85.83
83.69
85.02
85.57

92.37
91.12
91.90
92.22

82.33
80.06
81.14
81.60

90.31
88.92
89.59
89.87

Fig. 14. Comparative uncertainty visualization across different techniques.

than 0.05, they are represented with a ✓ symbol; if they are 0.05 or
greater, they are represented with a ✗ symbol.
The results are categorized based on the p-values as follows: results
with p-values below 0.05 for both IoU and Dice are classified as
strongly significant; results where at least one metric has a 𝑝-value
below 0.05 are considered significant; and results that do not meet
this threshold are classified as not significant. This statistical analysis compares our methods with the other compared methods. If we
consider the three tables together and count the overall results for
statistical significance, we have 21 results that are strongly significant,
3 that are significant, and 9 that are not significant, out of a total of
33 evaluations. Given this distribution, we consider our results to be
statistically significant.

highest scores on the BUS and ISIC-17 datasets and the second-highest
scores on ISIC-16. To ensure robustness, we ran each model five times.
Although we utilized five evaluation criteria for performance evaluation, we used the IoU and Dice for statistical validation, as these are the
two most crucial metrics for image segmentation. During evaluation,
we benchmarked CLSCA for the BUS dataset and UAFF for the ISIC-17.
For ISIC-16, UAFF performed better than CLSCA, though it achieved
the second position because U-Net-iAFF achieved the highest score.
Consequently, for statistical validation through 𝑝-value comparison, we
focused on these leading models against the other 11 models for their
respective datasets.
To determine which statistical test (paired t-test or Wilcoxon test)
is appropriate for calculating the 𝑝-value for our data, we first need
to assess the normality of our data distributions. Therefore, we first
utilized the Shapiro–Wilk test [72] to evaluate the normality of our
data. If the p-values from the Shapiro–Wilk test for the results (IoU and
Dice) of both models are greater than 0.05, this suggests that the data
follow a normal distribution. In such cases, we use the paired t-test to
calculate the 𝑝-value. Otherwise, we use the Wilcoxon test.
Figs. 15, 16, and 17 are based on the p-values calculated for the
BUS, ISIC-16, and ISIC-17 datasets, respectively. If the p-values are less

5.6. Computational efficiency and effectiveness
We have compared the computational efficiency of both of our
proposed algorithms AHF-U-Net (UAFF) and AHF-U-Net (CLSCA), with
a range of established methods in medical image segmentation. For
each algorithm, we measured the execution time per epoch over a span
of 100 epochs. In Fig. 18, the number of epoch varies for different
14

Information Fusion 115 (2025) 102719

A.A. Munia et al.

Fig. 15. This statistical decision table is based on the p-values of our proposed method versus other methods for the BUS dataset [22]. The ✓ symbol represents p-values less
than 0.05, indicating statistical significance, while the ✗ symbol represents p-values greater than or equal to 0.05, indicating a lack of statistical significance.

Fig. 16. This statistical decision table is based on the p-values of our proposed method versus other methods for the ISIC-16 dataset [23]. The ✓ symbol represents p-values less
than 0.05, indicating statistical significance, while the ✗ symbol represents p-values greater than or equal to 0.05, indicating a lack of statistical significance.

Fig. 17. This statistical decision table is based on the p-values of our proposed method versus other methods for the ISIC-17 dataset [24]. The ✓ symbol represents p-values less
than 0.05, indicating statistical significance, while the ✗ symbol represents p-values greater than or equal to 0.05, indicating a lack of statistical significance.

algorithms because we applied an early stopping mechanism, which
terminates training if no improvement is observed in the IoU score of
the segmentation result for 20 consecutive epochs.
As a result of our analysis, it is observed that U-Net++ requires
the highest execution time among the tested algorithms. In contrast,
Unext showed the lowest computational demand, making it the most
efficient algorithm in terms of execution time. Although in the field
of medical image analysis, precise image segmentation is prioritized
over computational efficiency because precision in segmentation significantly impacts clinical outcomes. In most cases, delays in processing

times are acceptable if they result in more accurate and clinically useful
information.
Our algorithms, AHF-U-Net (UAFF) and AHF-U-Net (CLSCA), while
not achieving the lowest execution times, demonstrated precise image segmentation. Both algorithms did not reach the maximum number of epochs due to the early stopping mechanism. This indicates
a well-balanced approach to model training that conserves computational resources without compromising effectiveness. This early stopping mechanism not only prevents overfitting but also optimizes the
15

Information Fusion 115 (2025) 102719

A.A. Munia et al.

Fig. 18. Comparative analysis of execution times across epochs for various segmentation algorithms using the BUS dataset [22].

training duration by terminating the process when there is no further
improvement in model performance.
5.7. Explainability overview
To ensure that our proposed model is properly focusing or not on
the relevant pixels corresponding to the target object, we utilized GradCAM [73]. It is a powerful visual tool representing transparency and
interpretability in model predictions. It highlights where the model
directs its attention for predictions, and viewing the heatmap enables
us to understand whether the model is focusing on the appropriate
features. Such visualization is crucial in applications such as medical
imaging, which helps build radiologists’ trust and prevent misdiagnosis.
We applied Grad-CAM to all datasets that we used in this research.
Fig. 19 shows the heat map generated after applying Grad-CAM to the
layer immediately below the final layer of AHF-U-Net (UAFF). We use
the ‘jet’ colormap to visualize the heatmaps, where red hues indicate
the highest values or the most significant regions of the image, while
blue indicates the opposite. For example, the first two rows of Fig. 1
represent the image (collected from BUS [22]) and its corresponding
heat maps for BUS datasets. On the heat map, red corresponds to
the most significant region or tumor presence, and blue corresponds
to the less critical region or background. The tumor position on the
image aligns precisely with the red heightened areas of interest on the
heatmap, as shown in Fig. 19. Furthermore, the highlighted objects
show minimal background distractions. These effects result from adding
global spatial attention, global channel attention, and local channel
context. In summary, by applying Grad-CAM, we can understand the
reasoning behind the model’s predictions, strengthening our models’ interpretability and trustworthiness. This also mitigates the gap between
efficiency and explainability in AI-based medical imaging.
5.8. Ablation study
Fig. 19. First row shows the images collected from BUS [22] dataset, and the second
row illustrates the corresponding heatmaps generated after applying Grad-CAM to the
second-to-last layer of our architecture. The third and fourth rows represent the image
and heatmap for the ISIC-16 [23] dataset, while the last two represent the ISIC-17
dataset [24].

The proposed AFF-U-Net is built by integrating EAF and DAF modules with U-Net. To evaluate the contribution of each module, we
excluded them from the network one by one and analyzed the outputs.
Table 8 summarizes the results of two main evaluation metrics (IoU
and DICE) for three datasets in three different network configurations.
As AFF-U-Net has one EAF module and two types of DAF modules
(UAFF and CLSCA), we have designed the following configurations for
ablation experiments:

• Conf1 — deactivate the EAF module while using UAFF as the DAF
module.
16

Information Fusion 115 (2025) 102719

A.A. Munia et al.

Table 8
Comparison of IoU and DICE for ablation experiments with different AHF-U-NET configurations, where blue values represent
the highest score.
Methods

Conf1: Deactivate the EAF module (UAFF)
Conf2: Deactivate the EAF module (CLSCA)
Conf3: Deactivate the DAF module
AHF-U-NET (UAFF)
AHF-U-NET (CLSCA)

BUS

ISIC-16

ISIC-17

IoU

Dice

IoU

Dice

IoU

Dice

68.35
68.41
68.57
69.42
69.84

81.13
81.5
81.35
81.95
82.24

82.78
81.56
82.96
83.31
83.16

90.06
89.24
90.17
90.89
90.69

83.09
83.71
83.80
84.60
84.40

90.67
90.25
90.82
91.66
91.54

• Conf2 — deactivate the EAF module while using CLSCA as the
DAF module.
• Conf3 — deactivate the DAF module.

AHF-U-Net, we implement the uncertainty-aware versions of U-Net,
U-Net++, and U-NetAFF. Experimental results indicate that UA-AHFU-Net outperforms UA-U-Net UA-U-Net++ and UA-U-NetAFF for all
datasets.
Although we used spatial attention, channel attention, and attentionenhanced skip connections in this research, we did not include the
transformer approach. Beyond their success in Natural Language Processing (NLP), transformers are now gaining significant impact in
image segmentation and classification. Integrating transformers into
our model could enhance the segmentation process by emphasizing
the ability to handle complex dependencies on image data. The idea
can be considered for future research. Furthermore, this study does not
consider domain adaptation techniques. To ensure the generalizability
of segmentation models to recognize the diversity of medical imaging
contexts (MRI, CT, and ultrasound images), significant focus can be
placed on domain adaptation techniques. Also, to provide a more
comprehensive evaluation of the model, expanding the dataset with
more diverse and challenging cases would be beneficial. Additionally,
in this research, we have analyzed a few uncertainty quantification
techniques and found EvidenceCap suitable for our case, but it might
not be an optimal solution for all medical imaging challenges. Due
to the highly variable nature of medical images and the presence
of rare features, investigating appropriate uncertainty quantification
techniques for specified tasks could be a salient area of future research.
In conclusion, while our proposed methodologies demonstrate
strong performance in 2D medical image segmentation, they are not
without limitations. One of the main constraints is that our models have
not yet been applied to 3D datasets, which are increasingly common in
clinical practice. Therefore, extending our models to 3D datasets will
be a focus of our future research. Another technical limitation is our
model’s memory efficiency. The integration of attention mechanisms in
both the encoder and decoder components, while beneficial for segmentation accuracy, makes our models computationally heavy. As a result,
they may not be the most memory-efficient solutions, particularly for
deployment in resource-constrained environments. Future work will
also explore optimizing these architectures to enhance their efficiency
without compromising performance.

Another key feature of our model is the Hierarchical AttentionEnhanced (HAE) skip connection generated by the EAF module. Therefore, the HAE is automatically removed when we deactivate the EAF
module. Among these three configurations, Conf3 outperforms the
other two, indicating the impact of the HAE skip connection. Furthermore, the IoU and DICE of Conf1 and Conf2 indicate a significant
decrease in segmentation performance. The entire network has approximately 1% higher performance than these results, which is true for all
datasets. For the BUS dataset, AHF-U-NET (CLSCA) provides the highest
IoU (69. 84%) and DICE (82. 24%) while Conf1 offers the lowest IoU
(68. 35%) and DICE (81. 13%). We benchmarked AHF-U-Net(UAFF) for
ISIC-2016 and ISIC-2017. The highest IoU and DICE for ISIC-2016 are
83.11% and 90.78%, respectively. The lowest values are provided by
Conf2 (IoU = (81. 56%) and DICE = (89. 24%)). For ISIC-2017, the
highest IoU and DICE are 84.4 6% and 91.3 66%, respectively, while
Conf1 gives the lowest IoU (83.4 09%) and Conf2 gives the lowest DICE
(99.5 25%).
6. Conclusion and future work
Our proposed AHF-U-Net incorporates multilevel attention-guided
feature fusion on both the encoder and decoder sides of the U-Net
architecture. Additionally, we integrate simple and hierarchical skip
connections to transfer precise spatial information from the encoder
to the decoder branches. By combining these two mechanisms, our
network can focus on both ‘‘where (spatial)’’ and ‘‘what (channel)’’
is relevant in the image, which is a key requirement for segmenting
intricate medical images. Furthermore, we also present an uncertaintyaware version of the proposed model, UA-AHF-U-Net. Along with segmentation, this model provides the segmentation uncertainty. This is
crucial in medical imaging to guide radiologists in decision-making. We
conducted a detailed ablation study to emphasize the impact of the EAF
and DAF modules on the proposed model. Although the performance
difference between the proposed model and the EAF or DAF exclusion
is close to 1%, such a margin is not negligible in the context of medical
image analysis. To provide the explainability of the predicted result, we
utilize Grad-CAM which provides meaningful visual evidence to ensure
that our proposed model appropriately focuses on the relevant regions
of interest. For experimental analysis, we have taken three medical image datasets (i.g., Breast Ultrasound, ISIC16, ISIC17) and evaluated our
model with eleven previous state-of-the-art models. Based on the two
main evaluation metrics (IoU and DICE) selected for this investigation,
our model scored the highest for the breast ultrasound dataset, the
ISIC17 dataset, and the second highest for the ISIC16 dataset. To be
more specific we benchmarked AHF-U-Net (CLSCA) for the breast ultrasound dataset and achieved 70.12% IoU and 82.43% DICE; for ISIC-16
we benchmarked U-Net-iAFF which achieved the highest IoU (83.75%)
and DICE (91.15%), while the second best performance is given by
AHF-U-Net (UAFF) at 0.44% and 0.26% lower, respectively; for ISIC-17,
AHF-U-Net (UAFF) performs best with 84.6% IoU and 91.66% DICE.
None of the eleven benchmarking models works with the predicted
results’ uncertainty estimate. Hence, to compare the performance of

CRediT authorship contribution statement
Afsana Ahmed Munia: Writing – original draft, Visualization, Resources, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation.
Moloud Abdar: Writing – review & editing, Validation, Supervision,
Methodology, Investigation, Conceptualization. Mehedi Hasan: Validation, Resources, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis. Mohammad S. Jalali: Writing – review & editing, Validation, Supervision.
Biplab Banerjee: Writing – review & editing, Supervision. Abbas
Khosravi: Writing – review & editing, Validation, Supervision. Ibrahim
Hossain: Writing – review & editing, Supervision. Huazhu Fu: Writing
– review & editing, Supervision. Alejandro F. Frangi: Writing – review
& editing, Validation, Supervision.
Declaration of competing interest
We declare that there are no conflicts of interest to report.
17

Information Fusion 115 (2025) 102719

A.A. Munia et al.

Data availability

[21] M. Abdar, F. Pourpanah, S. Hussain, D. Rezazadegan, L. Liu, M. Ghavamzadeh, P.
Fieguth, X. Cao, A. Khosravi, U.R. Acharya, et al., A review of uncertainty quantification in deep learning: Techniques, applications and challenges, Information
Fus. 76 (2021) 243–297.
[22] W. Al-Dhabyani, M. Gomaa, H. Khaled, A. Fahmy, Dataset of breast ultrasound
images, Data Brief 28 (2020) 104863.
[23] D. Gutman, N.C. Codella, E. Celebi, B. Helba, M. Marchetti, N. Mishra, A.
Halpern, Skin lesion analysis toward melanoma detection: A challenge at the
international symposium on biomedical imaging (ISBI) 2016, hosted by the
international skin imaging collaboration (ISIC), 2016, arXiv preprint arXiv:1605.
01397.
[24] N.C. Codella, D. Gutman, M.E. Celebi, B. Helba, M.A. Marchetti, S.W. Dusza, A.
Kalloo, K. Liopyris, N. Mishra, H. Kittler, et al., Skin lesion analysis toward
melanoma detection: A challenge at the 2017 international symposium on
biomedical imaging (isbi), hosted by the international skin imaging collaboration
(isic), in: 2018 IEEE 15th International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI
2018), IEEE, 2018, pp. 168–172.
[25] H. Huang, L. Lin, R. Tong, H. Hu, Q. Zhang, Y. Iwamoto, X. Han, Y.W. Chen,
J. Wu, Unet 3+: A full-scale connected unet for medical image segmentation,
in: ICASSP 2020-2020 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and
Signal Processing, ICASSP, IEEE, 2020, pp. 1055–1059.
[26] Z. Tang, X. Peng, S. Geng, Y. Zhu, D.N. Metaxas, Cu-net: Coupled u-nets, 2018,
arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.06521.
[27] N. Siddique, S. Paheding, C.P. Elkin, V. Devabhaktuni, U-net and its variants for
medical image segmentation: A review of theory and applications, Ieee Access 9
(2021) 82031–82057.
[28] V. Ummadi, U-net and its variants for medical image segmentation: A short
review, 2022, arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.08470.
[29] X. Li, H. Chen, X. Qi, Q. Dou, C.W. Fu, P.A. Heng, H-DenseUNet: hybrid densely
connected unet for liver and tumor segmentation from CT volumes, IEEE Trans.
Med. Imaging 37 (12) (2018) 2663–2674.
[30] Ö. Çiçek, A. Abdulkadir, S.S. Lienkamp, T. Brox, O. Ronneberger, 3D U-net:
learning dense volumetric segmentation from sparse annotation, in: Medical
Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention–MICCAI 2016: 19th International Conference, Athens, Greece, October 17-21, 2016, Proceedings, Part
II 19, Springer, 2016, pp. 424–432.
[31] P. Zhao, J. Zhang, W. Fang, S. Deng, SCAU-net: spatial-channel attention U-net
for gland segmentation, Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 8 (2020) 670.
[32] Y. Chen, K. Wang, X. Liao, Y. Qian, Q. Wang, Z. Yuan, P.-A. Heng, ChannelUnet: a spatial channel-wise convolutional neural network for liver and tumors
segmentation, Front. Genet. 10 (2019) 1110.
[33] D. Peng, S. Xiong, W. Peng, J. Lu, LCP-net: A local context-perception deep
neural network for medical image segmentation, Expert Syst. Appl. 168 (2021)
114234.
[34] J. Ni, J. Wu, J. Tong, Z. Chen, J. Zhao, GC-Net: Global context network for
medical image segmentation, Comput. Methods Programs Biomed. 190 (2020)
105121.
[35] B. Koonce, B. Koonce, ResNet 34, in: Convolutional Neural Networks with Swift
for Tensorflow: Image Recognition and Dataset Categorization, Springer, 2021,
pp. 51–61.
[36] T.Y. Lin, P. Dollár, R. Girshick, K. He, B. Hariharan, S. Belongie, Feature
pyramid networks for object detection, in: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2017, pp. 2117–2125.
[37] A. Jungo, M. Reyes, Assessing reliability and challenges of uncertainty estimations for medical image segmentation, in: Medical Image Computing and
Computer Assisted Intervention–MICCAI 2019: 22nd International Conference,
Shenzhen, China, October 13–17, 2019, Proceedings, Part II 22, Springer, 2019,
pp. 48–56.
[38] J. Postels, F. Ferroni, H. Coskun, N. Navab, F. Tombari, Sampling-free epistemic
uncertainty estimation using approximated variance propagation, in: Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, 2019, pp.
2931–2940.
[39] S. Yang, T. Fevens, Uncertainty quantification and estimation in medical image
classification, in: Artificial Neural Networks and Machine Learning–ICANN 2021:
30th International Conference on Artificial Neural Networks, Bratislava, Slovakia,
September 14–17, 2021, Proceedings, Part III 30, Springer, 2021, pp. 671–683.
[40] L. Ju, X. Wang, L. Wang, D. Mahapatra, X. Zhao, Q. Zhou, T. Liu, Z. Ge,
Improving medical images classification with label noise using dual-uncertainty
estimation, IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 41 (6) (2022) 1533–1546.
[41] M. Abdar, A. Khosravi, S.M.S. Islam, U.R. Acharya, A.V. Vasilakos, The need for
quantification of uncertainty in artificial intelligence for clinical data analysis:
increasing the level of trust in the decision-making process, IEEE Syst. Man
Cybern. Mag. 8 (3) (2022) 28–40.
[42] S. Kohl, B. Romera-Paredes, C. Meyer, J. De Fauw, J.R. Ledsam, K. MaierHein, S. Eslami, D. Jimenez Rezende, O. Ronneberger, A probabilistic u-net for
segmentation of ambiguous images, Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 31 (2018).
[43] Y. Gal, Z. Ghahramani, Dropout as a bayesian approximation: Representing
model uncertainty in deep learning, in: International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR, 2016, pp. 1050–1059.

Data will be made available on request.
Acknowledgment
We thank Professor Ender Konukoglu at ETH-Zurich and a member
of the Computer Vision Laboratory at the Department of Information
Technology and Electrical Engineering, ETH, Switzerland, for reviewing
the article and providing feedback and comments.
References
[1] N. Salpea, P. Tzouveli, D. Kollias, Medical image segmentation: A review of
modern architectures, in: European Conference on Computer Vision, Springer,
2022, pp. 691–708.
[2] A. Lin, B. Chen, J. Xu, Z. Zhang, G. Lu, D. Zhang, Ds-transunet: Dual swin
transformer u-net for medical image segmentation, IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas.
71 (2022) 1–15.
[3] F. Yousefirizi, A.K. Jha, J. Brosch-Lenz, B. Saboury, A. Rahmim, Toward highthroughput artificial intelligence-based segmentation in oncological PET imaging,
PET Clinics 16 (4) (2021) 577–596.
[4] Q. Lin, M. Luo, R. Gao, T. Li, Z. Man, Y. Cao, H. Wang, Deep learning based
automatic segmentation of metastasis hotspots in thorax bone SPECT images,
PLoS One 15 (12) (2020) e0243253.
[5] M.I. Khalil, M. Humayun, N. Jhanjhi, M. Talib, T.A. Tabbakh, Multi-class
segmentation of organ at risk from abdominal ct images: A deep learning
approach, in: Intelligent Computing and Innovation on Data Science: Proceedings
of ICTIDS 2021, Springer, 2021, pp. 425–434.
[6] R. Azad, N. Khosravi, M. Dehghanmanshadi, J. Cohen-Adad, D. Merhof, Medical
image segmentation on mri images with missing modalities: A review, 2022,
arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.06217.
[7] D.L. Pham, C. Xu, J.L. Prince, Current methods in medical image segmentation,
Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng. 2 (1) (2000) 315–337.
[8] M.H. Hesamian, W. Jia, X. He, P. Kennedy, Deep learning techniques for medical
image segmentation: achievements and challenges, J. Digit Imaging 32 (2019)
582–596.
[9] J. Long, E. Shelhamer, T. Darrell, Fully convolutional networks for semantic
segmentation, in: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 2015, pp. 3431–3440.
[10] P.F. Christ, F. Ettlinger, F. Grün, M.E.A. Elshaera, J. Lipkova, S. Schlecht, F.
Ahmaddy, S. Tatavarty, M. Bickel, P. Bilic, et al., Automatic liver and tumor
segmentation of CT and MRI volumes using cascaded fully convolutional neural
networks, 2017, arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.05970.
[11] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, T. Brox, U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image segmentation, in: Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted
Intervention–MICCAI 2015: 18th International Conference, Munich, Germany,
October 5-9, 2015, Proceedings, Part III 18, Springer, 2015, pp. 234–241.
[12] Z. Zhou, M.M. Rahman Siddiquee, N. Tajbakhsh, J. Liang, Unet++: A nested unet architecture for medical image segmentation, in: Deep Learning in Medical
Image Analysis and Multimodal Learning for Clinical Decision Support: 4th
International Workshop, DLMIA 2018, and 8th International Workshop, ML-CDS
2018, Held in Conjunction with MICCAI 2018, Granada, Spain, September 20,
2018, Proceedings 4, Springer, 2018, pp. 3–11.
[13] F. Milletari, N. Navab, S.-A. Ahmadi, V-net: Fully convolutional neural networks
for volumetric medical image segmentation, in: 2016 Fourth International
Conference on 3D Vision (3DV), Ieee, 2016, pp. 565–571.
[14] V. Badrinarayanan, A. Kendall, R. Cipolla, Segnet: A deep convolutional encoderdecoder architecture for image segmentation, IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach.
Intell. 39 (12) (2017) 2481–2495.
[15] Y. Dai, F. Gieseke, S. Oehmcke, Y. Wu, K. Barnard, Attentional feature fusion,
in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer
Vision, 2021, pp. 3560–3569.
[16] J. Fu, J. Liu, H. Tian, Y. Li, Y. Bao, Z. Fang, H. Lu, Dual attention network for
scene segmentation, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2019, pp. 3146–3154.
[17] B. Chen, Y. Liu, Z. Zhang, G. Lu, A.W.K. Kong, Transattunet: Multi-level
attention-guided u-net with transformer for medical image segmentation, 2021,
arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.05274.
[18] Q. Lai, S. Khan, Y. Nie, H. Sun, J. Shen, L. Shao, Understanding more about
human and machine attention in deep neural networks, IEEE Trans. Multimed.
23 (2020) 2086–2099.
[19] O. Oktay, J. Schlemper, L.L. Folgoc, M. Lee, M. Heinrich, K. Misawa, K. Mori,
S. McDonagh, N.Y. Hammerla, B. Kainz, et al., Attention u-net: Learning where
to look for the pancreas, 2018, arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.03999.
[20] B. Ghoshal, A. Tucker, B. Sanghera, W. Lup Wong, Estimating uncertainty in deep
learning for reporting confidence to clinicians in medical image segmentation and
diseases detection, Comput. Intell. 37 (2) (2021) 701–734.
18

Information Fusion 115 (2025) 102719

A.A. Munia et al.

[59] A.A. Munia, I. Hossain, S.M. Jalali, P. Tabarisaadi, A. Rahman, S. Nahavandi,
Uncertainty-aware deep learning for segmenting ultrasound images of breast
tumours, in: 2023 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, SMC, 2023, pp. 4228–4235, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/SMC53992.2023.
10394411.
[60] H. Kittler, H. Pehamberger, K. Wolff, M. Binder, Diagnostic accuracy of
dermoscopy, Lancet Oncol. 3 (3) (2002) 159–165.
[61] E. Tiu, Metrics to evaluate your semantic segmentation model, 2019,
URL:
https://towardsdatascience.com/metrics-to-evaluate-your-semanticsegmentation-model-6bcb99639aa2. Towards Data Science.
[62] D. Müller, I. Soto-Rey, F. Kramer, Towards a guideline for evaluation metrics in
medical image segmentation, BMC Res. Notes 15 (1) (2022) 1–8.
[63] N. Anuar, A.B.M. Sultan, Validate conference paper using dice coefficient,
Comput. Inf. Sci. 3 (3) (2010) 139.
[64] J.M.J. Valanarasu, V.M. Patel, Unext: Mlp-based rapid medical image segmentation network, in: International Conference on Medical Image Computing and
Computer-Assisted Intervention, Springer, 2022, pp. 23–33.
[65] X. Xie, W. Zhang, X. Pan, L. Xie, F. Shao, W. Zhao, J. An, Canet: Context aware
network with dual-stream pyramid for medical image segmentation, Biomed.
Signal Process. Control 81 (2023) 104437.
[66] J. Chen, Y. Lu, Q. Yu, X. Luo, E. Adeli, Y. Wang, L. Lu, A.L. Yuille, Y. Zhou,
Transunet: Transformers make strong encoders for medical image segmentation,
2021, arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.04306.
[67] H. Cao, Y. Wang, J. Chen, D. Jiang, X. Zhang, Q. Tian, M. Wang, Swin-unet: Unetlike pure transformer for medical image segmentation, in: European Conference
on Computer Vision, Springer, 2022, pp. 205–218.
[68] A. Paszke, S. Gross, F. Massa, A. Lerer, J. Bradbury, G. Chanan, T. Killeen,
Z. Lin, N. Gimelshein, L. Antiga, A. Desmaison, A. Kopf, E. Yang, Z. DeVito,
M. Raison, A. Tejani, S. Chilamkurthy, B. Steiner, L. Fang, J. Bai, S. Chintala, PyTorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library,
in: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32, Curran Associates,
Inc., 2019, pp. 8024–8035, URL: http://papers.neurips.cc/paper/9015-pytorchan-imperative-style-high-performance-deep-learning-library.pdf.
[69] Google, Google colab, 2017, Available at: https://colab.research.google.com/
?utm_source=scs-index.
[70] T. Akiba, S. Sano, T. Yanase, T. Ohta, M. Koyama, Optuna: A next-generation
hyperparameter optimization framework, in: Proceedings of the 25th ACM
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, ACM,
2019, pp. 2623–2631.
[71] Q. Xu, Z. Ma, H. Na, W. Duan, DCSAU-Net: A deeper and more compact splitattention U-Net for medical image segmentation, Comput. Biol. Med. 154 (2023)
106626.
[72] S.S. Shapiro, M.B. Wilk, An analysis of variance test for normality (complete
samples), Biometrika 52 (3–4) (1965) 591–611.
[73] R.R. Selvaraju, M. Cogswell, A. Das, R. Vedantam, D. Parikh, D. Batra, Gradcam: Visual explanations from deep networks via gradient-based localization, in:
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, 2017, pp.
618–626.

[44] A. Kendall, Y. Gal, What uncertainties do we need in bayesian deep learning for
computer vision? Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 30 (2017).
[45] F. Wenzel, J. Snoek, D. Tran, R. Jenatton, Hyperparameter ensembles for
robustness and uncertainty quantification, Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 33
(2020) 6514–6527.
[46] Y. Yang, X. Guo, Y. Pan, P. Shi, H. Lv, T. Ma, Uncertainty quantification in
medical image segmentation with multi-decoder U-net, in: International MICCAI
Brainlesion Workshop, Springer, 2021, pp. 570–577.
[47] J. Xiang, P. Qiu, Y. Yang, FUSsnet: Fusing two sources of uncertainty for
semi-supervised medical image segmentation, in: International Conference on
Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention, Springer, 2022,
pp. 481–491.
[48] W. Lu, J. Lei, P. Qiu, R. Sheng, J. Zhou, X. Lu, Y. Yang, Upcol: Uncertaintyinformed prototype consistency learning for semi-supervised medical image
segmentation, in: International Conference on Medical Image Computing and
Computer-Assisted Intervention, Springer, 2023, pp. 662–672.
[49] N.T. Arun, L. Weiss, A. Schoenling, M. Radomski, F. Guyette, N. Roux, B. Daley,
M.J. Morris, H. Choset, J. Galeotti, Temporal Monte Carlo dropout for robust
uncertainty quantification: Application to point-of-care ultrasound-guided nerve
blocks, in: Medical Imaging with Deep Learning, Short Paper Track, 2023.
[50] S. Salari, A. Rasoulian, H. Rivaz, Y. Xiao, FocalErrorNet: Uncertainty-aware focal
modulation network for inter-modal registration error estimation in ultrasoundguided neurosurgery, in: International Conference on Medical Image Computing
and Computer-Assisted Intervention, Springer, 2023, pp. 689–698.
[51] M. Sensoy, L. Kaplan, M. Kandemir, Evidential deep learning to quantify
classification uncertainty, Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 31 (2018).
[52] K. Zou, X. Yuan, X. Shen, Y. Chen, M. Wang, R.S.M. Goh, Y. Liu, H. Fu,
EvidenceCap: Towards trustworthy medical image segmentation via evidential
identity cap, 2023, arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.00349.
[53] S. Shang, J. Zhang, X. Wang, X. Wang, Y. Li, Y. Li, Faster and lighter
meteorological satellite image classification by a lightweight channel-dilationconcatenation net, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Appl. Earth Obs. Remote Sens. 16 (2023)
2301–2317.
[54] H. Phan-Xuan, T. Le-Tien, T. Nguyen-Chinh, T. Do-Tieu, Q. Nguyen-Van,
T. Nguyen-Thanh, Preserving spatial information to enhance performance of
image forgery classification, in: 2019 International Conference on Advanced
Technologies for Communications, ATC, IEEE, 2019, pp. 50–55.
[55] A.P. Dempster, Upper and lower probabilities induced by a multivalued mapping,
in: Classic Works of the Dempster-Shafer Theory of Belief Functions, Springer,
2008, pp. 57–72.
[56] A. Jø sang, Subjective Logic, vol. 3, Springer, 2016.
[57] T. Minka, Estimating a Dirichlet distribution, Technical report, MIT, 2000.
[58] L.R. Rere, M.I. Fanany, A.M. Arymurthy, Simulated annealing algorithm for deep
learning, Procedia Comput. Sci. 72 (2015) 137–144.

19

