Computers and Electrical Engineering 123 (2025) 110004

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Computers and Electrical Engineering
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/compeleceng

SC-MambaFew: Few-shot learning based on Mamba and selective
spatial-channel attention for bearing fault diagnosis
Gia-Bao Truong, Thi-Thao Tran ∗, Nhu-Linh Than, Van Quang Nguyen,
Thi Hue Nguyen , Van-Truong Pham ∗
Department of Automation Engineering, School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Hanoi University of Science and Technology, Vietnam

ARTICLE

INFO

Dataset link: https://github.com/giabao804/fe
w-shot-mamba.git
Keywords:
Bearing fault diagnosis
Few-shot learning
Mamba
ConvMixer
Covariance metric neural network

ABSTRACT
Bearings are crucial yet vulnerable components in electrical equipment, prone to rapid degradation and failure. Diagnosing bearing failures is both critical and highly informative, but
constructing large datasets, especially in industrial settings, remains a significant challenge.
To address this issue, we propose a novel end-to-end few-shot learning framework, SCMambaFew(Selective Channel Mamba-based Few-shot learning), for bearing fault diagnosis,
which achieves high performance even with limited training data. The proposed framework
is built on the Mamba architecture incorporating spatial attention and a Global-Local Channel
Attention (GLCA) module to extract both fine-grained local details and broader global patterns,
enhancing model performance. The extracted features are further refined through aSelective
Channel (SC) mechanism and passed into a covariance-based classification module. Extensive
experiments on the HUST and Case Western Reserve University (CWRU) bearing datasets,
evaluated using metrics such as Accuracy, Recall, and F1 score, as well as statistical significance
testing with the Wilcoxon signed-rank test, demonstrates that the proposed SC-MambaFew
outperforms existing deep learning methods. Both qualitative and quantitative results highlight
its robustness and potential for real-world industrial applications, particularly in data-scarce
scenarios.
Our code is available at: https://github.com/giabao804/few-shot-mamba.

1. Introduction
Roller bearings play a vital role in rotating machinery, facilitating the movement and rotation of engine components. However,
their performance can degrade due to wear and unevenness, leading to significant system issues such as unexpected machine
shutdowns, increased energy consumption, and reduced engine efficiency. Failures of roller bearings can impact the entire production
line in addition to the engine. Unplanned machine shutdowns and production pauses can cause substantial time and financial losses.
Therefore, monitoring and maintaining the stable operation of critical components in factories and manufacturing plants is essential.
Online machine condition monitoring systems have become increasingly important in identifying machinery issues early, thereby
preventing production system inefficiencies, the risk of breakdowns, or unwarranted malfunctions.
In bearing fault diagnosis tasks, traditional methods such as the Hilbert transform [1,2] have played a significant role in extracting
features from vibration signals and detecting anomalies. These techniques provide insights into oscillation amplitude, characteristic
frequencies, and phase shifts, aiding in the analysis of system operating conditions. However, manual signal processing can be

∗ Corresponding authors.
E-mail addresses: thao.tranthi@hust.edu.vn (T.-T. Tran), truong.phamvan@hust.edu.vn (V.-T. Pham).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compeleceng.2024.110004
Received 21 September 2024; Received in revised form 19 November 2024; Accepted 8 December 2024
Available online 26 December 2024
0045-7906/© 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

Computers and Electrical Engineering 123 (2025) 110004

G.-B. Truong et al.

complex, time-consuming, and resource-intensive, often requiring expert intervention. Recent advancements in artificial intelligence
have introduced machine learning (ML) and deep learning (DL) models as promising tools for bearing fault diagnosis. Classical ML
algorithms, including Support Vector Machine (SVM) [3], Relevance Vector Machine (RVM) [4], K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN) [5],
Sparse Measure [6], Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) [7], and Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) [8], have demonstrated varying
degrees of success. Innovative combinations, such as the integration of Dempster–Shafer (DS) evidence theory with multiclass
relevance vector machine (mRVM) [4], have proven effective in handling uncertain information in bearing data.
While machine learning methods show promise, the current trend favors deep learning models for their ability to automatically
extract features from large and nonlinear datasets. Variations of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [9], such as temporal and
dimensional attention mechanisms [10] and the Attention Mechanism Wide-scale Multichannel Temporal Convolutional Network
(AWM-TCN) [11], have improved fault detection accuracy. Transfer learning techniques further enhance these models by leveraging
pre-trained architectures from large datasets [12,13].
Despite their success, the performance of deep learning models heavily depends on the availability of high-quality labeled data,
which is often scarce in industrial settings. Within industrial rotating machinery, accessing and collecting data from bearings located
deep within motor systems poses formidable challenges due to harsh operating conditions, including high temperatures, vibrations,
and pressure. To address this, few-shot learning (FSL) models have been explored. Baselines such as the Siamese Neural Network [14]
have been extended with architectures like Wide-Kernel Deep CNNs (WD-CNN) by Zhang et al. [15] and ConvMixer architecture
by Vu et al. [16] to address bearing fault classification with limited training data. Furthermore, the utilization of Matching Net
by Li et al. [17] and the application of Prototype Network by Shen et al. [18] have been put into practice. For problems with
insufficient labels, Wang et al. [19] combined self-supervised learning (SSL) with Siamese Networks to capture inherent features
of unlabeled samples. Research on few-shot signal identification has demonstrated that, while outperforming conventional models,
diagnosis still needs to be performed after several steps. However, these methods often rely on simplistic metrics like Euclidean and
cosine distances, limiting their ability to handle complex scenarios. With a different approach, Li et al. developed an end-to-end
architecture named CovaMNET [20], based on distribution consistency. With the covariance matrix acting as a representation of
the correlation between each sample in the query set and the support set, several studies [21,22] across a wide range of fields have
demonstrated the efficacy of this measure.
On the other hand, although Convolutional Neural Network variants have shown great success in fault diagnosis, including
their ability to effectively capture local patterns in the data, these models often struggle with long-range dependencies or global
context, which are essential for diagnosing more complex faults or those that manifest over longer time spans. To address the
limitations of CNNs in modeling long-range dependencies, Transformer-based models have gained attention. Originally developed
for natural language processing (NLP), Transformers utilize self-attention mechanisms to capture both local and global dependencies
in sequences. In the realm of bearing fault analysis, to overcome weaknesses of CNN-based models, some works have been proposed
based on the Transformer architecture, such as Vu et al. [23], Wang et al. [24,25], and Han et al. [26]. These studies demonstrate
effectiveness due to the high impact of the ‘‘self-attention’’ mechanism.
Despite their performance, Transformer-based models require substantial computational resources when processing large-scale
datasets or high-resolution images, resulting in a significant processing burden. A question arises about exploring a technique that
would not only be an efficient feature extractor but also manage computational requirements effectively. State–space models (SSM),
an important concept from control theory, have recently gained traction in deep learning. Researchers’ efforts in creating S4 [27]
have mitigated issues such as vanishing and exploding gradients and reduced efficiency with longer inputs. However, focusing on
accuracy, S4 still has a long way to go to catch up with Transformers. Thanks to Gu and Dao’s introduction of State Space Models
with Selective Scan (S6), also known as Mamba [28], the technique enhanced S4 with a selective mechanism that emphasizes
pertinent data in an input-dependent manner. This method forms the crucial foundation for applying SSM to image tasks. Although
Mamba has been widely applied in classification tasks, such as Vision Mamba [29] and VMamba [30], as well as segmentation
tasks [31–33], to the best of our knowledge, it has not been explored for few-shot bearing fault diagnosis.
Building upon the limitations of existing works, in this study, we introduce SC-MambaFew, a novel framework designed to bridge
the gaps in feature extraction, model adaptability, and performance under data-scarce scenarios. The proposed approach leverages
the Mamba architecture and Channel Selection (SC) that improves feature extraction by selectively focusing on the most important
channels in the input data.
The motivations and contributions of this work can be outlined as follows:
• Overcoming multistage limitations with end-to-end framework: Unlike previous multistage approaches, SC-MambaFew employs an end-to-end framework, eliminating intermediate steps that can degrade performance. This unified structure simplifies
deployment and ensures feature extraction and classification are jointly optimized, resulting in more robust and accurate fault
diagnosis.
• Improving feature extraction: Existing methods often rely on either spatial or channel attention but fail to holistically capture
both dimensions. SC-MambaFew introduces a novel dual-attention design:
– The GL-Mamba module enhances spatial feature extraction, addressing the lack of spatial adaptiveness in many
state-of-the-art methods, and innovatively applying Mamba to few-shot bearing fault diagnosis.
– The GLCA mechanism that integrates both global and local attention to identify important features across the entire input
and within specific local regions. Combined with the MLKFE block, GLCA compensates for the channel attention gap by
extracting multiscale features, crucial for handling diverse fault types and operating conditions.

2

Computers and Electrical Engineering 123 (2025) 110004

G.-B. Truong et al.

• Enhancing generalizability with Covariance Metric: SC-MambaFew leverages the Covariance Metric to model the distribution
consistency of feature embeddings. This approach ensures robust comparisons between query images and the support set,
enhancing adaptability to varying datasets and conditions.
• Combining spatial and channel insights for comprehensive representation: By integrating the Mamba Attention (a mechanism
where Spatial Attention is designed based on Mamba) and GLCA mechanism, SC-MambaFew achieves richer and more
comprehensive feature representations, improving diagnostic accuracy.
In summary, SC-MambaFew offers a lightweight, adaptable, and efficient solution for real-world applications in bearing fault
diagnosis.
2. Related work
Conv-Mixer: The Conv-Mixer model [34] is a simple neural network with significantly lower computational costs compared
to models like Vision Transformer (ViT) [35], MLP-Mixer [36], and ResNet [37], while still maintaining high performance on
similar dataset sizes. Inspired by ViT and MLP-Mixer, ConvMixer divides images into patches and processes them through Depthwise
Convolution (DWC) and Pointwise Convolution (PWC) blocks. This ConvMixer model enables the extraction of spatial features
independently for each channel via DWC block and then combines them to create rich and detailed image representations via PWC
block, thereby delivering powerful and efficient processing capabilities.
State Space Models (SSMs): are widely used in control theory to describe, analyze, and design multivariate systems. These models
represent a system using a set of first-order differential equations (ODEs) that relate the input sequence 𝑢(𝑡) ∈ R1×𝐷 to the output
𝑣(𝑡) ∈ R1×𝐷 via a hidden state space 𝑠(𝑡) ∈ R1×𝑁 (𝑁 > 𝐷):
𝑠′ (𝑡) = 𝑠(𝑡) + 𝑢(𝑡),
(1)
𝑣(𝑡) = 𝑠(𝑡),
where  ∈ R𝑁×𝑁 ,  ∈ R𝑁×𝐷 , and  ∈ R𝐷×𝑁 represent the state transition matrix, input matrix, and output matrix, respectively.
This formulation, while insightful, is expressed in continuous-time and thus difficult to directly utilize in deep learning models
that operate in discrete-time steps. To adapt this for implementation in neural networks, it is discretized from its continuous-time
formulation using the zero-order hold (ZOH) approach with a given time step 𝛥 > 0. The discrete approximations of  and  are
computed as follows:
 = exp(𝛥)

(2)

 = (𝛥)−1 (exp(𝛥) − ) 

where  is the identity matrix. Using these discretized matrices  and  the state–space model can be updated in a recursive manner
for each time step 𝑡:
𝑠𝑡 = 𝑠𝑡−1 + 𝑢𝑡

(3)

𝑣𝑡 = 𝑠𝑡

Setting the initial state 𝑠−1 = 0 for the first input ensures that the system starts without any hidden state. The output sequence can
then be computed via a global convolution operation:
(
)
𝐿−1
 = , , … ,  
(4)
𝐯=𝐮∗
where  ∈ R𝐿 is a convolutional kernel, and 𝐿 is the length of the input sequence. This kernel is precomputed from , , and ,
allowing for efficient parallel computation.
Mamba and Vmamba: Inspired by the State–Space Model (SSM), a classic approach in control theory used to describe and analyze
multivariable systems, Gu and Dao introduced the State Space Models with Selective Scan (S6), also known as Mamba [28]. Despite
being newly launched, Mamba has rapidly gained recognition from the AI research community. This innovative approach is highly
promising, applicable to various Natural Language Processing (NLP) and Computer Vision (CV) tasks, and rivals Transformer-based
models in terms of speed, memory efficiency, and accuracy. Liu et al. built on the capabilities of Mamba to propose Vmamba [30]
for vision tasks, leveraging a 2D-Selective-scan (SS2D) module. This enhancement allows Vmamba to process 2D image data while
retaining the advantages of the original Mamba architecture, such as linear complexity and global receptive fields.
2D Selective Scan: The 2D Selective Scan is an extension of the Mamba architecture, specifically designed to handle 2D image data,
as opposed to the 1D sequences in NLP tasks. SS2D enhances the state–space modeling capabilities by employing a four-directional
scanning mechanism, referred to as Cross-Scan, which captures spatial dependencies in image patches. The input image is divided
into patches and scanned along four different directions, producing four separate sequences. These sequences are fed into the S6
block (the core module of Mamba), which processes them individually. The outputs from these four directions are then aggregated
to form a 2D feature map that is passed to the next layer in the network:
𝑧̂ = 𝑆 𝑆2𝐷(𝑧) =

4
∑

(5)

𝑆6 (scan(𝑧, 𝑖))

𝑖=1

3

Computers and Electrical Engineering 123 (2025) 110004

G.-B. Truong et al.

where 𝑧 is the input feature map, and 𝑧̂ is the output feature map after passing through the SS2D block. The function scan(𝑧, 𝑖)
converts the patches of the input image into sequences based on the direction 𝑖. SS2D offers a linear computational complexity
while maintaining global receptive fields, making it highly effective for image processing tasks that require efficient and scalable
feature extraction.
Covariance Metric Network: In the realm of few-shot learning, various approaches have been explored to address the challenges
of learning when only a small number of samples are available. Traditional metric learning approaches, such as Prototypical
Networks [38] and Relation Networks [39], typically rely on simple distance metrics like Euclidean distance or learnable similarity
measures. Li et al. proposed an end-to-end Covariance Metric Network (CovaMNet) [20] to enhance the performance of fewshot learning by exploiting covariance metrics to extract second-order statistical information from the data, thereby significantly
improving the performance of few-shot learning models. Experiments have demonstrated that CovaMNet achieves good results on
various datasets, showcasing significant potential for exploitation and development in few-shot learning tasks.
3. Methodology
3.1. The proposed model
Distance metrics like Euclidean and cosine similarity are foundational tools in machine learning, commonly used for tasks such
as clustering, classification, and nearest neighbor searches. These metrics perform well in low-dimensional spaces where the data
distribution is relatively simple. However, as the dimensionality of the data increases, these metrics encounter several challenges. In
high-dimensional spaces, the notion of distance becomes less intuitive, and the distance between any two points tends to converge, a
phenomenon often referred to as the ‘‘curse of dimensionality’’. This convergence makes it difficult to distinguish between different
samples, especially when the data distribution is complex. Moreover, in cases where the available data is limited, the effectiveness
of these distance metrics further diminishes. For instance, in applications involving spectrum images, where the features may be
represented in only two dimensions in Euclidean space, traditional metrics may fail to capture the intricate relationships between
data points. This limitation makes it challenging to build robust models that can generalize well to new, unseen data. Therefore,
there is a pressing need for alternative approaches that can overcome these challenges and provide more reliable feature comparisons
in high-dimensional spaces.
To address these limitations, we introduce a novel few-shot learning framework that integrates attention mechanisms with a
covariance-based metric [20] for feature comparison. Our framework is designed to work effectively with high-dimensional data,
such as spectrum images, where traditional distance metrics fall short. The key innovation lies in the use of both spatial attention
based on Mamba [40] which are very trendy now and channel attention mechanisms, which allow the model to focus on the most
relevant features, combined with a covariance metric that captures the relationships between these features more effectively than
traditional distance measures.
The first step in our framework involves transforming the input data from the time domain to the spectral domain. We apply the
transformation method described in [41], which utilizes the Short-time Fourier transform (STFT) to convert time-domain signals
into their spectral form. This transformation is crucial for preserving the important frequency information that is often lost in
traditional signal processing methods. Unlike preprocessing techniques such as high-pass or low-pass filtering, which require careful
selection of cut-off frequencies and can result in data loss, our approach directly uses time–frequency graphs. This approach ensures
that the model retains both time-domain and frequency-domain information, which is essential for accurate feature extraction and
subsequent learning.
Our proposed SC-MambaFew framework, as shown in Fig. 1, incorporates two types of attention mechanisms: spatial attention
and channel attention. These mechanisms are designed to enhance the model’s ability to focus on the most informative parts of the
input data, thereby improving the quality of the extracted features. The spatial attention mechanism in our framework is inspired by
the Mamba architecture, which has gained popularity in recent research [28]. Spatial attention named Mamba Attention implying
that the spatial Attention is built based on Mamba architecture helps the model to focus on specific regions of the input data that
are most relevant to the task at hand. By highlighting these regions, the model can more effectively capture the spatial relationships
within the data, which is particularly important in applications involving images or other types of structured data. In addition to
spatial attention, our framework also includes the Channel Attention which is designed to focus on the most relevant channels or
features. This mechanism is developed by combining both global and local attention, allowing the model to consider the importance
of each feature across the entire input space as well as within specific local regions. The combination of these two types of attention
mechanisms enables the model to capture a more comprehensive set of features, thereby improving its ability to differentiate between
different classes.
The final component of our framework is the classification module namely Covariance Metric Layer in Fig. 1, which utilizes a
Covariance-based Metric to compare features. This approach is inspired by the work of [20], which demonstrated the effectiveness
of covariance matrices in capturing the relationships between features in high-dimensional spaces.
In our framework, the dataset is divided into two parts: a support set (S) with K labeled samples for each class and a query set (Q)
with N distinct categories. The proposed architecture consists of two main parts: the feature extraction module and the classification
module. After the input images are processed through the spatial and channel attention modules, the extracted features are combined
using a channel-selective mechanism. Let 𝑐, ℎ, and 𝑤 represent the channel, height, and width of the feature maps, respectively.
4

Computers and Electrical Engineering 123 (2025) 110004

G.-B. Truong et al.

Fig. 1. Our proposed SC-MambaFew model.

Define 𝑑 = ℎ × 𝑤 as the total spatial dimension of the feature map. The features from the support set are used to compute the local
covariance matrix for each class, defined as:
𝛴𝑖Local =

𝐾
1 ∑
(𝑋 − 𝜇)(𝑋𝑗 − 𝜇)⊤ ,
𝑛 − 1 𝑗=1 𝑗

(6)

where 𝑋𝑗 ∈ R𝑐×𝑑 represents the 𝑗-th input feature, and 𝜇 ∈ R𝑐×𝑑 denotes the mean vector of the features within the class.
Here, 𝑛 = 𝐾 × 𝑑 is the total number of local deep descriptors, calculated as the product of the number of samples 𝐾 and the
feature dimension 𝑑. The covariance matrix 𝛴𝑖Local characterizes the relationships among feature dimensions for each class. By
capturing these relationships, it provides a robust similarity measure that extends beyond traditional distance metrics, improving
class representation and differentiation.
The relationship between a query image and the support set is then determined by the following function:
𝑓 (𝐱, 𝛴𝑖𝐿𝑜𝑐 𝑎𝑙 ) = 𝑑 𝑖𝑎𝑔(𝐱𝑇 𝛴𝑖𝐿𝑜𝑐 𝑎𝑙 𝐱)

(7)

where 𝐱 ∈ R𝑐×𝑑 is the feature vectors of the query image, and 𝛴𝑖Local is the class-specific local covariance matrix. This metric compares
the query image’s features against the support set’s features. The function 𝑓 (𝐱, 𝛴𝑖𝐿𝑜𝑐 𝑎𝑙 ) computes a scalar value that indicates the
correlation between the query image’s feature vector and the class-specific distribution. This correlation score reflects how well the
features of the query image align with the characteristics of class 𝑖. By evaluating this score across all classes in the support set, we
obtain a vector that represents the degree of similarity between the query image and each class. The vector of similarity scores for
all classes is then concatenated sequentially, forming a comprehensive feature vector of length 𝑑 × 𝑁, where 𝑑 is the dimensionality
of the feature vector 𝑓 (𝐱, 𝛴𝑖𝐿𝑜𝑐 𝑎𝑙 ) and 𝑁 is the total number of classes, called as F .
We utilize a one-dimensional convolutional layer to compute the statistical score for each query image in order to determine its
class affiliation. The kernel size and stride for this layer are denoted by 𝑑. The computation can be formalized as follows:
̃ score = conv1d(𝐹 , stride = 𝑑)

(8)

In this equation, 𝐹̃score is the statistical score calculated by the one-dimensional convolution operation applied on the feature set 𝐹 ,
with stride equal to 𝑑. This stride value, determined by the vector’s length, allows the convolutional layer to systematically cross the
entire values of the vector that depicting the similarity of the query image with the support image’s distribution, thereby effectively
calculating the statistical score and contributing in the signal fault’s classification.
5

Computers and Electrical Engineering 123 (2025) 110004

G.-B. Truong et al.

Fig. 2. ConvMixPP block.

Fig. 3. GL-Mamba block. Our convolutional layers in red in local spatial attention are deployed by dilated convolutions with kernel size 3 × 3 and dilated rate
respectively equal to 1,2,3.

3.2. Mamba attention module
While Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have been widely recognized for their effectiveness in various image processing
tasks, recent advancements have sought to further optimize their performance. Among these, ConvMixer [34] represents a
significant breakthrough, offering a substantial reduction in computational complexity while maintaining high effectiveness in
feature extraction and image classification tasks. This innovation has demonstrated that it is possible to achieve competitive
performance with a more streamlined architecture. Building on the foundation laid by ConvMixer, we have utilized an enhanced
version from [42], termed ConvMixer Plus Plus (ConvMixPP). Thanks to Le et al. with the Attention Mixer in [42] in proposing
two core layers: Priority Spatial Attention (PSA) and Priority Channel Attention (PCA). The ConvMixPP is specifically designed to
optimize the feature extraction phase, a critical step in bearing faults diagnosis task. The primary innovation in ConvMixPP, shown
in Fig. 2, is inspired by Le et al. method then combining with GL-Mamba block to enhance rich information for spatial attention
roles.
To obtain global attention maps efficiently, we observed that Mamba delivers highly competitive performance. Recent developments in Mamba, which are rooted in the State Space Model from control theory, have shown remarkable advancements over existing
architectures, particularly the Transformer. The core mechanism of the Transformer ‘‘self-attention’’ requires a time complexity of
𝑂(𝑛2 ) during training and 𝑂(𝑛) during inference, which can become computationally expensive as the sequence length increases.
In contrast, Mamba integrates sequential processing with specific transformations that reduce algorithmic complexity, all while
maintaining high performance. This efficiency, coupled with Mamba’s ability to handle complex tasks effectively, motivated us to
develop a module inspired by Mamba.
In our architecture, we aim to extend the spatial information captured by the ConvMixPP block to incorporate both global
and local attention perspectives. This led to the creation of our novel GL-Mamba block, which is depicted in Fig. 3. Our block is
developed from the SS-Conv-SSM framework proposed in [40], and it consists of two(parallel branches:
the local spatial branch and
)
the main Mamba branch. The input feature maps from the ConvMixPP block, sized 𝐻𝑝 × 𝑊𝑝 × 𝐶 , where 𝑝 is the patch size in the
Patch Embedding layer (in this case, set to 4), are divided into two equal parts along the channel dimension, with each subset being
processed separately by the two branches.
In the upper branch, the focus is on capturing local spatial information at multiple scales. Similar to the method proposed
in [43], the local spatial attention mechanism extracts contextual relationships
by analyzing
spatial patterns across different scales.
(
)
Specifically, the input feature map, denoted as 𝐗𝟏 , with dimensions 𝐻𝑝 × 𝑊𝑝 × 𝐶2 , is first normalized using a BatchNorm layer.
Following normalization, the data is passed through a Local Spatial Attention layer, where a 1 × 1 convolution reduces the number
6

Computers and Electrical Engineering 123 (2025) 110004

G.-B. Truong et al.

Fig. 4. GLCA block.

of channels by a factor of four, yielding a more computationally efficient tensor for subsequent processing. To capture spatial context,
we apply a local attention mechanism that leverages three dilated convolutions with odd kernel sizes, ranging from 3 × 3 to 7 × 7,
and dilation rates 𝑑𝑖 = 1, 2, 3. These convolutions enable the model to capture both short-range and long-range dependencies within
the feature map. Each of these operations can be represented as:
𝐻 𝑊 𝐶
(
)
× ×
𝐗reduced
∈ R 𝑝 𝑝 8 = Conv1×1 𝐗norm
(9)
𝟏
𝟏
(𝐝 )

𝐻

𝐗𝟏 𝐢 ∈ R 𝑝

× 𝑊𝑝 × 𝐶8

(
)
= Dilated-Conv𝑘𝑖 ×𝑘𝑖 ,𝑑=𝑑𝑖 𝐗reduced
,
𝟏

𝑑𝑖 ∈ {1, 2, 3},

𝑘𝑖 ∈ {3, 5, 7}

(10)

After applying the convolutions, the resulting attention maps are activated through a SiLU non-linearity
function.
The output features
(
)
are then concatenated along the channel dimension, yielding a tensor with dimensions 𝐻𝑝 × 𝑊𝑝 × 𝐶2 , which contains rich local
spatial information. This process can be formalized as:
(
)
𝐻 𝑊 𝐶
× ×
(𝐝 )
(𝐝 )
(𝐝 )
𝐞𝐝𝐮𝐜𝐞𝐝)
𝐗local
∈ R 𝑝 𝑝 2 = Concat 𝐗(𝐫
, 𝐗𝟏 𝟏 , 𝐗𝟏 𝟐 , 𝐗𝟏 𝟑
(11)
𝟏
𝟏
𝐻

×𝑊 ×𝐶

Thus, the resulting tensor in R 𝑝 𝑝 2 contains spatial patterns across various scales, significantly enriching the model’s local spatial
information representation. The lower branch is dedicated to extracting global attention by analyzing long-range dependencies across
the entire feature map. The input features in this branch undergo Layer Normalization followed by a depthwise convolution with a
kernel size of 5 × 5, which helps to preserve spatial structure while reducing computational overhead.
(
)
𝐗conv
= Depthwise-Conv5×5 LayerNorm(𝐗𝟐 )
(12)
𝟐
Next, the processed features are passed into the 2D Selective Scan layer [30], which captures global relational information across
the image. Unlike the original SSM-based approach, we streamlined this branch by removing unnecessary linear layers, focusing
instead on the core functionality of the SS2D layer to reduce parameter count and improve efficiency. With SS2D, the model scans
global information through every pixel in each spectrum image in four directions: from top to bottom, bottom to top, left to right,
and right to left. This multidirectional scanning allows for a thorough spatial analysis, capturing relationships between pixels across
the entire feature map. After passing through the SS2D layer, the output features are normalized again via Layer Normalization
and subsequently multiplied element-wise with the initial, normalized input features from this branch. This process ensures that the
model effectively captures global relationships while retaining the original input’s structural integrity:
global

𝐗𝟐

𝐻

∈R𝑝

× 𝑊𝑝 × 𝐶2

= 𝐗SS2D
× 𝐗conv
𝟐
𝟐

(13)

The final step in the GL-Mamba block involves concatenating the outputs from the local and global branches along the channel
dimension. This concatenation fuses both local and global spatial information, providing the model with a comprehensive
understanding of the input feature map. After concatenation, the channels are shuffled to promote interactions between different
feature dimensions, further enhancing the model’s representation power:
(
(
))
𝐻 𝑊
× ×𝐶
global
𝐗final = Shuffle Concat 𝐗local
, 𝐗𝟐
∈R𝑝 𝑝
(14)
𝟏
By combining both local and global spatial attention, the GL-Mamba block significantly improves the model’s ability to capture
spatial relationships, leading to better performance in classification tasks.
3.3. Channel attention module
From the fact that image data type which is very difficult to classify such as spectrum image, because of noise from the errors
in the measurement stages, from transformations when converting from time-series domain to frequency domain, in early-stages,
feature maps play an important role for the high performance of the model. We found that obtain information from many different
directions of the images provides critical support (see Fig. 4).
In addition to the Mamba attention module, which excels at capturing spatial relationships, we recognized the need to also
focus on the relationships along the channel dimension to provide a more comprehensive view of the data. To address this, we
7

Computers and Electrical Engineering 123 (2025) 110004

G.-B. Truong et al.

designed a new module called the Channel Attention Module, which is composed of two sub-modules: Multiscale Large Kernel
Feature Extraction (MLKFE) [23] and Global Local Channel Attention (GLCA). The feature maps extracted by the MLKFE block are
subsequently fed into the GLCA module, where they are further refined to capture more concentrated and relevant information.
The MLKFE [23] module is pivotal in our architecture because it enhances the model’s ability to capture diverse and characteristic
information, which is especially critical when dealing with limited training samples. We drew inspiration from the work of Vu
et al. [23], who introduced the residual large kernel attention (ResLKA) layer. This layer is adept at capturing both short-range
and long-range pixel relationships within feature maps, an attribute that is particularly important for extracting features in complex
and noisy datasets, such as those used in bearing fault diagnosis. The intricate nature of these datasets, which often contain a
mix of varied and noisy data, makes it essential to use an approach like MLKFE that can capture fine-grained details and more
comprehensive relationships needed for accurate identification.
Building on the success of global-local attention mechanisms, particularly the one proposed by Song et al. in their Global-Local
Attention Module (GLAM) [43], we introduce the Global Local Channel Attention (GLCA) module for the first time in the context
of bearing fault diagnosis. Song et al.’s GLAM was designed to capture both local and global attention across spatial and channel
dimensions. From this early research, recognizing the unique needs of bearing fault identification we adapted their approach by
designing a specialized GLCA module focused solely on channel attention. In our GLCA module, we emphasize the significance of
both local and global channel information by splitting the feature maps obtained from the MLKFE [23] backbone into two equal
parts. The first part is processed by the upper branch, which is dedicated to local channel attention. This branch focuses on capturing
fine-grained channel relationships that are crucial for identifying subtle patterns within the data. The second part flows through
the lower branch, which is designed to capture global channel attention. This branch is essential for understanding the broader,
more holistic relationships across the entire feature map. By combining the strengths of these two parallel branches, our GLCA
module ensures that the model can effectively balance the need for both detailed local information and broad global context. This
dual attention mechanism is particularly beneficial in bearing fault diagnosis, where the datasets are often characterized by their
complexity and the presence of noise. The GLCA module enhances the model’s ability to accurately identify and classify faults, even
when only a limited amount of training data is available.
Similar to the Mamba attention module, to lever up the importance of both local and global information according to the deep
dimension, we propose a novel channel attention mechanism that balances both local and global information through a dual-branch
𝐻

× 𝑊𝑝 ×𝐶
𝐻 𝑊 𝐶
× 𝑝 ×2
𝑝

architecture. The input feature maps 𝐗 ∈ R 𝑝
𝐻 𝑊 𝐶
× 𝑝 ×2
𝑝

from the Multiscale Large Kernel Feature Extraction (MLKFE) block are split

and 𝐗𝟐 ∈ R
, where 𝐗𝟏 focuses on local channel relationships and 𝐗𝟐 emphasizes global
into two parts: 𝐗𝟏 ∈ R
interactions. In the first branch, we calculate the local channel relationships using 𝐗𝟏 . The process begins with Global Average
Pooling (GAP) applied across the spatial dimensions to aggregate information into a channel-wise vector:
𝐻

𝐅𝟏 = GAP(𝐗𝟏 ) = 𝐻
𝑝

𝑊

1

𝑝
𝑝
∑
∑

× 𝑊𝑝

𝑖=1 𝑗=1

(15)

𝐗𝟏 (𝑖, 𝑗)

𝐶

This produces 𝐅𝟏 ∈ R 2 , a compact representation of the channel information in 𝐗𝟏 . Next, to model local dependencies between
channels, we apply a 1D convolution with a kernel size 𝑘 = 3, followed by a sigmoid activation function:
𝐅′𝟏 = 𝜎(Conv1D(𝐅𝟏 , 𝑘 = 3))

(16)

𝐶

Here, 𝐅′𝟏 ∈ R 2 denotes the local attention scores for each channel, where 𝜎 is the sigmoid function. This process refines the local
feature representation by emphasizing meaningful cross-channel interactions.
The final locally-attended feature map 𝐀𝟏 is computed by an element-wise multiplication between the input 𝐗𝟏 and the attention
vector 𝐅′𝟏 , followed by a residual connection to retain the original input:
𝐀𝟏 = 𝐗𝟏 ⊙ 𝐅′𝟏 + 𝐗𝟏

(17)

This residual connection preserves key information from the original features, ensuring stable gradient flow during backpropagation
and avoiding feature degradation.
The second branch is designed to capture global channel relationships using a non-local attention mechanism. Starting with the
𝐻

feature map 𝐗𝟐 ∈ R 𝑝

× 𝑊𝑝 × 𝐶2

, we first apply Global Average Pooling (GAP) to obtain a channel-wise vector:

𝐅𝟐 = GAP(𝐗𝟐 )

(18)

Then, we compute two key elements, the query 𝐐𝟐 ∈ R
size 𝑘 = 3, followed by sigmoid activation:
𝐐𝟐 = 𝜎(Conv1D(𝐅𝟐 , 𝑘 = 3)),

𝐶
2

𝐶
2

and key 𝐊𝟐 ∈ R , by processing 𝐅𝟐 through a 1D convolution with kernel
(19)

𝐊𝟐 = 𝜎(Conv1D(𝐅𝟐 , 𝑘 = 3))
𝐻𝑊 𝐶
×2
𝑝2

Simultaneously, the feature map 𝐗𝟐 is reshaped into a matrix 𝐕𝟐 ∈ R
, where each row corresponds to a spatial position, and
the columns represent channel activations. To model global interactions, we compute the outer product of 𝐐𝟐 and 𝐊𝟐 , generating a
𝐶 𝐶
global attention map 𝐅𝟐 ∈ R 2 × 2 :
𝐅𝟐 = Softmax(𝐊𝟐 ⊤ 𝐐𝟐 )

(20)
8

Computers and Electrical Engineering 123 (2025) 110004

G.-B. Truong et al.

Fig. 5. Selective channel module.

The softmax function normalizes the attention map across channels, highlighting the most important global channel dependencies.
The value tensor 𝐕𝟐 is then modulated by the attention map 𝐅𝟐 through matrix multiplication:
(21)

𝐀𝟐 = 𝐕𝟐 × 𝐅𝟐
𝐻 𝑊 𝐶
× 𝑝 ×2
𝑝

, producing the globally-attended feature map.
Finally, 𝐀𝟐 is reshaped back into its original dimensions R
The final output of the attention module is obtained by concatenating the locally- and globally-attended feature maps 𝐀𝟏 and
𝐀𝟐 along the channel dimension:
𝐻

𝐀final = Concat(𝐀𝟏 , 𝐀𝟐 ) ∈ R 𝑝

× 𝑊𝑝 ×𝐶

(22)

This dual-branch attention mechanism efficiently captures both local and global channel dependencies, leading to improved feature
representation for complex tasks such as bearing fault diagnosis.
This approach not only captures global and local channel interactions more efficiently but also maintains the stability of the
gradient during backpropagation, ensures that the model remains computationally feasible, coming to more robust model efficiency
in challenges requiring intricate feature representation, such as bearing fault diagnosis.
3.4. Selective channel
Inspired by the groundbreaking architecture of ‘‘Selective Kernel Networks’’ [44], we propose a novel module named ‘‘Selective
Channel’’ (SC), as illustrated in Fig. 5 , as a mechanism that improves feature extraction by selectively focusing on the most important
channels in the input data, ensuring that the most relevant aspects are prioritized for the task. The SC module is designed to enhance
the selection process of critical channels after the input spectrum image is processed through two parallel branches, each employing
a distinct attention mechanism. These branches generate two sets of feature maps, denoted as 𝟏 and 𝟐 , which are crucial for
capturing different aspects of the input data, according to Mamba attention and Channel attention.
The primary objective of the SC module is to efficiently determine the importance of each channel across the two subsets of
feature maps. This begins with an element-wise summation of the outputs from the two branches, which serves to integrate the
diverse information captured by each attention mechanism:
 = 𝟏 + 𝟐

(23)

This fusion step allows the model to combine the complementary strengths of the two branches, ensuring that both local and
global features are preserved in the resulting feature map . The summation also simplifies subsequent processing by reducing
the dimensionality of the problem to a single unified feature map.
To further capture the global context and channel-wise importance, we apply Global Average Pooling (GAP) to the combined
feature map . This operation effectively compresses the spatial dimensions, producing a channel-wise statistical vector 𝐠 ∈ R𝑐 :
𝐻

𝐠 = 𝑔𝑎𝑝 () = 𝐻
𝑝

𝑊

1

𝑝
𝑝
∑
∑

× 𝑊𝑝

𝑖=1 𝑗=1

(𝑖,𝑗)

(24)

The GAP operation is essential because it aggregates information across the entire spatial domain, resulting in a summary statistic
for each channel. This summary is crucial for understanding the overall significance of each channel, independent of the specific
spatial locations.
To enable precise and adaptive channel selection, the channel-wise statistics vector 𝐠 is then passed through a fully connected
(FC) layer. This layer not only transforms the vector but also reduces its dimensionality, which is beneficial for computational
efficiency. The result is a compact feature vector 𝐬 ∈ R𝐶×1 :
(25)

𝐬 = 𝜁(𝜎(𝐆))

9

Computers and Electrical Engineering 123 (2025) 110004

G.-B. Truong et al.

Fig. 6. Attention-weighted vectors.

where 𝜁 denotes the activation function, which in our case is the ReLU nonlinear function, chosen for its ability to introduce nonlinearity and prevent vanishing gradients. The 𝜎 term represents Batch Normalization. The compact vector 𝐆 is derived from 𝐠
through a 1D convolution with a kernel size 𝑘 = 1:
𝐆 = Conv1d(𝐠, 𝑘 = 1)

(26)

This step ensures that the vector 𝐬 encapsulates the most critical channel-wise information in a compact and efficient manner.
Once we have 𝐬, it contains two sets of values that correspond to the importance of each channel in the respective feature maps
𝟏 and 𝟐 . To achieve an adaptive selection across different spatial scales of information, we employ a soft attention mechanism,
which is guided by the compact feature descriptor 𝐬. The soft attention mechanism applies a softmax function to the channel-wise
values:
exp(𝑠𝑢 )
exp(𝑠𝑙 )
𝛼𝑐 =
; 𝛽𝑐 =
(27)
exp(𝑠𝑢 ) + exp(𝑠𝑙 )
exp(𝑠𝑢 ) + exp(𝑠𝑙 )
Here, 𝛼𝑐 and 𝛽𝑐 represent the attention weights (the effectiveness of this approach is visually illustrated in Fig. 6 with the weight
of 𝛼𝑐 vector and 𝛽𝑐 vector) assigned to each channel 𝑐 in 𝟏 and 𝟐 , respectively. The terms 𝑠𝑢 and 𝑠𝑙 are the channel-wise values
derived from the compact feature descriptor 𝐬. The softmax function is crucial as it ensures that the attention weights are normalized
and sum to one, which allows the network to focus on the most relevant channels while suppressing the less important ones.
Finally, the output feature map is computed by applying the attention vectors to the original feature maps. This is done through
an element-wise multiplication of the attention weights 𝛼𝑐 and 𝛽𝑐 with the corresponding feature maps 𝟏 and 𝟏 , followed by a
summation:
𝑜𝑢𝑡 = 𝛼𝑐 × 𝟏 + 𝛽𝑐 × 𝟐

(28)

The resulting feature map 𝑜𝑢𝑡 effectively integrates the most relevant spatial and channel-wise information, preserving the strengths
of both attention mechanisms while mitigating their individual weaknesses.
3.5. Summary on key modules of SC-MambaFew
The following section highlights the distinctive contributions of the GL-Mamba, GLCA, and SC modules, which are central to the
SC-MambaFew framework.
The GL-Mamba module introduces a dual-branch mechanism that combines local spatial attention and global spatial attention
to capture diverse spatial dependencies. The local spatial branch utilizes multi-scale dilated convolutions to extract fine-grained
spatial patterns at varying receptive fields, ensuring sensitivity to both short- and long-range dependencies. The global spatial branch
employs depthwise convolutions to efficiently model global spatial relationships. By integrating these two perspectives, GL-Mamba
provides a more comprehensive spatial feature representation compared to existing methods, which often prioritize only one type
of spatial attention.
The GLCA module is the first adaptation of a global-local channel attention mechanism for bearing fault diagnosis. It employs a
two-branch approach to separately process local and global channel information, addressing the need for detailed feature extraction
and broad contextual understanding. The local channel branch captures fine-grained channel-specific patterns critical for detecting
subtle fault characteristics, while the global channel branch models holistic channel relationships across the feature map. This
dual-channel focus enhances the model’s ability to handle noisy and complex industrial datasets.
The SC (Selective Channel) module introduces a novel mechanism for selectively weighting feature channels based on their
relevance to the diagnosis task. It integrates outputs from the GLCA branches using element-wise summation, followed by an
attention-based selection process that dynamically refines feature importance. This mechanism allows the model to prioritize the
most informative channels, improving diagnostic accuracy, particularly in data-scarce scenarios.
These innovations collectively address critical gaps in existing few-shot fault diagnosis methods, enabling the proposed
SC-MambaFew framework to achieve superior performance under limited data conditions.

10

Computers and Electrical Engineering 123 (2025) 110004

G.-B. Truong et al.

Algorithm 1 Training algorithm for our proposed framework SC-MambaFew
𝑛

𝑛

𝑞
𝑠
,
, Query Set  = {(𝑋𝑗𝑞 , 𝑌𝑗𝑞 )}𝑗=1
Require: Support Set  = {(𝑋𝑖𝑠 , 𝑌𝑖𝑠 )}𝑖=1
Base Model 𝑓𝜃 initialized with random weights,
Number of epochs 𝐸, Number of iterations 𝑇 , Number of classes 𝑁
Ensure: An optimized weight parameter 𝜃
Class Probabilities 𝑝(𝑌 𝑞 |𝑋 𝑞 , ) for each example 𝑋 𝑞 in 
1: Initialize Random initial weights of the model 𝜃
2: for 𝑒 = 1 to 𝐸 do
3:
for 𝑡 = 1 to 𝑇 do
𝑛𝑞
𝑛𝑠
4:
Form a support set  = (𝑋𝑖 , 𝑌𝑖 )𝑖=1
and a query set  = (𝑋𝑖 , 𝑌𝑖 )𝑖=1
from the training set 𝛥𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛 , where 𝑛𝑠 = 𝑁 ∗ 𝐾 and
𝑛𝑞 = 𝑁 ∗ 𝑄
5:
for 𝑖 = 1 to 𝑁 do
6:
/* Feature extraction */
Using both branches: GL-Mamba Attention and Channel Attention modules to compute feature maps of 𝐾 support
images at layer 𝑖th:
∑
𝑠𝑖 ← 𝐾1 𝐾
𝑗=1 𝑠𝑖𝑗 with 𝑠𝑖 = [𝑠𝑖1 , 𝑠𝑖2 , ..., 𝑠𝑖𝐾 ] (from the upper branch),
1 ∑𝐾
𝑠′ 𝑖 ← 𝐾 𝑗=1 𝑠′ 𝑖𝑗 with 𝑠′ 𝑖 = [𝑠′ 𝑖1 , 𝑠′ 𝑖2 , ..., 𝑠′ 𝑖𝐾 ] (from the lower branch),
and feature maps of query images at layer 𝑖th: 𝑞 𝑖 and 𝑞 ′ 𝑖
7:
/* Selective channel processing */
Compute  ′ 𝑠𝑖 and  ′ 𝑞𝑖 using the Selective Channel module:
 ′ 𝑠𝑖 = 𝐹 𝑢𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛(𝑠𝑖 , 𝑠′ 𝑖 ) ;  ′ 𝑞 𝑖 = 𝐹 𝑢𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛(𝑞 𝑖 , 𝑞′ 𝑖 )
8:
/* Covariance Metric Layer */
𝑖
Calculate 𝛴local
using Eq (6)
9:
end for
10:
Calculate relation vector 𝑓 ( ′ 𝑞 𝑖 , 𝛴𝑖𝐿𝑜𝑐 𝑎𝑙 ) using Eq (7)
11:
Compute 𝑌̂ 𝑞 from the statistic score ̂ score using Eq (8)
12:
Compute the Contrastive Loss 𝐿CL,𝑆𝑐 (𝑌̂ 𝑞 , 𝑌 𝑞 )
13:
/* Gradient descent update */
Update 𝜃𝑖′ = 𝜃 − 𝛼∇𝜃𝑖 𝐿CL,𝑆𝑐 (𝑓𝜃 )
14:
/* Weight update */
∑
𝜃 ← 𝜃 − 𝛼∇𝜃 (𝑋 ,𝑌 )∈ 𝐶 𝐿 (𝑃 (𝑋), 𝑌 )
15:
end for
16: end for

4. Experiment
4.1. Datasets
To evaluate the performance of the proposed SC-MambaFew method in comparison with other state-of-the-art models in bearing
fault diagnosis, we conducted experiments on two public datasets, including the HUST bearing dataset [45], and the Case Western
Reserve University (CWRU) dataset [46]. These datasets were selected for their relevance and distinct characteristics in fault
diagnosis, allowing for a comprehensive evaluation of our model’s performance, as described more detail in the following sections.

4.1.1. HUST bearing dataset
The HUST bearing dataset [45] was developed by the research team at Hanoi University of Science and Technology, downloaded
at: (HUST benchmark).1 The HUST dataset places greater emphasis on the diversity of faults and their interrelationships rather than
focusing on the size of the faults. The majority of the defects in this dataset are artificially generated, each with a uniform width
of 0.2 mm. The data is structured with 7 distinct labels, representing various types of faults. Three of these labels correspond to
major faults that are comparable to those in the CWRU dataset, while the remaining three represent related, yet distinct, fault types.
By offering a broader spectrum of fault types and their associations, the HUST bearing dataset provides an ideal platform for more
comprehensive fault diagnosis and classification tasks. This diversity makes it highly suitable for evaluating the effectiveness of
machine learning models in capturing complex fault patterns and relationships.

1

https://data.mendeley.com/datasets/cbv7jyx4p9/3.
11

Computers and Electrical Engineering 123 (2025) 110004

G.-B. Truong et al.

4.1.2. CWRU dataset
The Case Western Reserve University (CWRU) dataset [46] is widely regarded as a benchmark in machine learning tasks,
particularly in fault detection and bearing fault diagnosis. The CWRU data can be downloaded at: (CWRU benchmark).2
This dataset, with labeled data, is commonly employed for training, testing, and algorithm development in these fields. The CWRU
dataset is organized into four main categories: 48k normal-baseline, 48k drive-end fault, 12k drive-end fault, and 12k fan-end fault.
Each fault class is further categorized by three fault locations: Ball fault, Inner ring fault, and Outer ring fault. Additionally, for
each fault type, the dataset provides three fault diameters: 0.007 in., 0.014 in., and 0.021 in. This detailed structure of the dataset
allows for a thorough evaluation of models across a range of fault conditions and is frequently used as a standard for benchmarking
in the bearing fault diagnosis community.
4.2. Implementation details
Before initiating the training process, we divide the dataset into query-support pairs. This strategy allows the few-shot end-toend approach to effectively utilize the available information, even when data is limited. The support set is split into several image
classes, and during each training iteration, the number of images required is determined by the number of classes in the dataset. For
example, in the case of 1-shot learning, the required number of images is calculated as 1 × num_classes + 1, while for 5-shot learning,
it becomes 5 × num_classes + 1. We use the HUST Bearing dataset with 7 classes and the CWRU dataset with 10 classes. During
training, ContrastiveLoss is employed as the loss function for our proposed model, ensuring effective learning from the available
data. The training process of our proposed model is given in Algorithm 1.
To ensure a fair comparison between our proposed model and other state-of-the-art approaches, we standardized conditions
across all methods. For each method, we applied an Adam optimizer and used a learning rate scheduler that reduces the learning
rate by a factor of 2 every 10 epochs during training with the init value is 0.001. In experiments, we trained all compared methods
for 100 epochs with NVIDIA TeslaT4 16 GB GPU.
The total number of test samples in our experiments for the HUST dataset is 700 samples, and 750 samples for the CWRU
dataset. The maximum number of training samples for the HUST dataset is 16 800, and for the CWRU dataset, it is 19 800. Various
experimental scenarios with limited data were conducted, including 168, 840, 16 800 training samples for HUST; and 30, 60, 300,
19 800 training samples for CWRU data. In each training scenario, the number of validation samples is equal to the used testing
samples with every specific dataset.
4.3. Experimental results
This section presents the experimental results for bearing fault diagnosis using the proposed SC-MambaFew model, along with
recent deep learning-based few-shot models, on the HUST Bearing and CWRU datasets. To evaluate the performance of the proposed
method compared to other models, we use the confusion matrix, t-SNE visualization, and evaluation metrics, including Accuracy,
Recall, and F1 scores, for each test set of the HUST and CWRU datasets. It is worth noting that, due to the balanced nature of
the test data setup, the Precision metric is not included in the tables as it is identical to the Accuracy. In addition, for a seasonal
comparison, in tables where both 1-shot and 5-shot cases are presented, for the CWRU data, we provide results using at least 60
training samples to evaluate the model’s ability in the 5-shot, 10-way setting. In the ablation study focusing solely on the 1-shot
case, we include results with as few as 30 training samples to demonstrate the performance of the proposed model under conditions
of very limited data.
Moreover, to demonstrate the statistical significance of the results obtained by the proposed method compared to each baseline
model, we compute the p-value using the Wilcoxon signed-rank test [47]. The test is performed on the predicted probabilities for
the corresponding labels, obtained from the softmax outputs of the proposed and compared models. If p-value is less than or equal
to the significance level (𝛼 = 0.05), the results are considered statistically significant indicating that the observed differences are
likely genuine [48].
To be more specific, we provide statistic scores and visualization results, including plots of confusion matrix and t-distributed
Stochastic Neighbor Embedding (t-SNE) of representative models on the two datasets. For quantitative assessment, we present statical
metrics of the proposed model and recent deep learning- based few-shot learning models in tables, using method reference numbers,
arrows for indicators, and boldface to highlight the best performing metrics. An upward arrow (↑) indicates that a higher value
presents better performance, whereas a downward arrow (↓) signifies that a smaller value is preferred. In particular, a small p-value
in a row corresponding to a method indicates that the proposed SC-MambaFew model is statistically significantly different from
that method as determined by the Wilcoxon signed-rank test. Additionally, the number of parameters (Params in millions), and the
Floating-Point Operations per Second (FLOPS in Gigaflops) of each model or baseline are provided in all tables. Smaller values of
Params and FLOPS reflect better performance in terms of computational complexity.
The key results for both the HUST and CWRU datasets using the proposed SC-MambaFew method are summarized in Table 1.
As shown in the table, even with as few as 168 training samples on the HUST dataset, the proposed model achieves an Accuracy
of 86.15%, a Recall of 87.89%, and an F1 score of 87.7% in the 1-shot scenario. The results for the CWRU dataset are similarly
impressive, with all evaluation metrics exceeding 97.7% even with as few as 60 training samples.
A comparison of the proposed method with other methods, along with relevant descriptions, is provided in the following sections.

2

https://engineering.case.edu/bearingdatacenter/download-data-file.
12

Computers and Electrical Engineering 123 (2025) 110004

G.-B. Truong et al.

Table 1
Key results on the HUST and CWRU datasets with different training samples by the proposed model.
(a) Key results on the HUST data with different training samples
Training samples

168
840
16 800

Test samples

700
700
700

Accuracy↑

Recall↑

F1↑

1-shot

5-shot

1-shot

5-shot

1-shot

5-shot

86.15
98.71
99.76

87.52
98.86
100

87.89
98.32
99.43

87.52
97.47
100

87.70
98.59
99.59

87.52
98.16
100

(b) Key results on the CWRU data with different training samples
Training samples

60
300
19 800

Test samples

750
750
750

Accuracy↑

Recall↑

F1↑

1-shot

5-shot

1-shot

5-shot

1-shot

5-shot

97.73
99.73
99.80

98.40
99.87
99.91

97.74
99.47
99.87

98.25
99.47
100

97.73
97.48
99.87

98.32
97.75
99.95

4.3.1. Comparison results on the HUST bearing dataset
This section presents intensive experiments conducted on the HUST bearing dataset. These experiments utilized different portions
of the training data (1%, 5%, and 100%), corresponding to 168, 840, and 16 800 training samples, respectively. To evaluate the
performance of the proposed SC-MambaFew model, we also re-implemented several recent deep learning-based few-shot learning
methods. The compared models include CovaMNet [20] (Code),3 SA-CovaMNet [21] which we implemented ourselves based on
the paper description and the CovaMNet baseline, and MF-Net [49] (Code).4
Table 2 presents the results of the proposed SC-MambaFew model as well as the aforementioned models, for both the 1-shot and
5-shot scenarios, with varying amount of training samples. The results in Table 2 highlight the robustness of our approach across
various training sample sizes. Notably, with only 1% of the training data (168 training samples), our method achieved 86.15%
accuracy for the 1-shot case and 87.52% for the 5-shot case, outperforming the original CovaMNET [20], which only reached 80.03%
for 5-shot. Similarly, our model surpassed SA-CovaMNET [21] (80.15%) and MF-Net [49] (80.10%), both of which incorporate the
attention mechanism, showcasing that our Mamba-based model can outperform traditional attention mechanisms. For the case of
16 800 training samples (100% training data of the HUST dataset), the proposed SC-MambaFew also obtained comparative accuracy
excepting for the 1-shot case while compared to the MF-Net (99.76% vs. 99.98%). Similar to Accuracy metric, our proposed model
also show better scores in terms of Recall and F1 metrics in all training scenarios for both 1-shot and 5-shot tests.
In addition to the classification scores including Accuracy, Recall, and F1, which are scalar values computed from the entire set of
predicted labels versus true labels, we calculate the p-value using the Wilcoxon signed-rank test [47] on the predicted probabilities
for the corresponding labels by the proposed model and each of the aforementioned models. The p-values for the significance test
between our proposed model and CovaMNET [20], SA-CovaMNET [21], and MF-Net [49] are provided in the same row as the
corresponding method in Table 2. As shown in the last two columns of Table 2, except for the 5-shot case when compared with
MF-Net, the p-values are smaller than 0.05, particularly in the 1-shot case compared with MF-Net (𝑝 = 0.0009), CovaMNet (𝑝 ≪ 0.05
for all cases), and SA-CovaMNet (𝑝 = 0.0003) for both 840 and 16 800 training samples.
For further comparative interpretation, we present representative plots of confusion matrix and t-SNE for the proposed and
CovaMNet and SA-CovaMnet methods, using as few as 168 training samples, in Fig. 7. The right plot of this figure (Fig. 7 c) clearly
demonstrates better clustering between the regions of each category by the proposed model while compared to compared methods.
4.3.2. Comparison results on the CWRU dataset
In this section, we provide a comprehensive comparison between our proposed model and several leading few-shot learning
models widely used for classification tasks, including CovaMNet [20], SA-CovaMNet [21], MF-Net [49], QS-Former [24], and
Ensemble-Net [23]. For a fair evaluation, we re-implemented all competing models using the open-source code provided by their
respective authors except for SA-CovaMNet. The codes include: CovaMNet [20] (Code),5 MF-Net [49] (Code),6 QS-Former [24]
(Code),7 and Ensemble-Net [23] (Code).8 For SA-CovaMNet [21], we implemented the model ourselves based on the paper
description and the CovaMNET baseline. The experiments were conducted under both 1-shot 10-way and 5-shot 10-way scenarios,
with the training data size ranging from as few as 30 samples to 19 800 samples.
Table 3 presents the evaluation metrics for both 1-shot and 5-shot experiments across varying amounts of training samples. As
shown in the table, the proposed SC-MambaFew consistently outperforms the state-of-the-arts models under various experimental
conditions, achieving the highest accuracy in most cases. These results underscore the robustness and generalization capability of

3
4
5
6
7
8

https://github.com/WenbinLee/CovaMNet.
https://github.com/HungVu307/mixer-former-fewshot.
https://github.com/WenbinLee/CovaMNet.
https://github.com/HungVu307/mixer-former-fewshot.
https://github.com/SissiW/QSFormer.
https://github.com/HungVu307/Few-shot-via-ensembling-Transformer-with-Mahalanobis-distance.
13

Computers and Electrical Engineering 123 (2025) 110004

G.-B. Truong et al.

Table 2
Comparison on the HUST dataset for 1-shot and 5-shot cases using (a) 168 training samples, (b) 840 training samples, and (c)
16 800 training samples. The p-value represents the results of Wilcoxon signed-rank test between the proposed method and the
compared methods.
(a) 168 training samples
Method

CovaMNet [20]
SA-CovaMNet [21]
MF-Net [49]
Proposed

Params (M)↓ FLOPS (G)↓

0.112
0.160
0.062
0.140

15.23 × 10−3
15.87 × 10−3
14.77 × 10−3
13.38 × 10−3

Accuracy↑

Recall↑

F1↑

1-shot 5-shot

1-shot 5-shot

1-shot 5-shot

1-shot

76.87
77.88
78.23
86.15

78.63
78.63
78.23
87.89

79.32
78.25
78.23
87.70

0.0068 0.0020
0.0419 0.0120
0.0009 0.0980

80.03
80.15
80.10
87.52

80.09
77.81
77.81
87.52

p-value ↓

80.06
78.96
78.93
87.52

5-shot

(b) 840 training samples
Method

CovaMNet [20]
SA-CovaMNet [21]
MF-Net [49]
Proposed

Params (M)↓ FLOPS (G)↓

0.112
0.160
0.062
0.140

15.23 × 10−3
15.88 × 10−3
14.77 × 10−3
13.38 × 10−3

Accuracy↑

Recall↑

F1↑

1-shot 5-shot

1-shot 5-shot

1-shot 5-shot

1-shot

97.24
97.36
97.58
98.71

97.87
98.27
97.64
98.32

97.92
98.27
97.88
98.59

0.0006 0.0003
0.0025 0.0003
0.0043 0.0513

97.98
98.27
98.13
98.86

94.66
96.78
94.66
97.47

p-value ↓

96.29
97.52
96.36
98.16

5-shot

(c) 16 800 training samples
Method

CovaMNet [20]
SA-CovaMNet [21]
MF-Net [49]
Proposed

Params (M)↓ FLOPS (G)↓

0.112
0.160
0.062
0.140

15.23 × 10−3
15.88 × 10−3
14.77 × 10−3
13.38 × 10−3

Accuracy↑

Recall↑

F1↑

1-shot 5-shot

1-shot 5-shot

1-shot 5-shot

1-shot

98.91
99.01
99.98
99.76

98.92
99.01
98.56
99.43

98.91
99.01
99.26
99.59

0.0003 0.0293
0.0289 0.0003
0.0380 0.1168

99.05
99.85
100
100

97.81
98.89
100
100

p-value ↓

98.42
99.37
100
100

5-shot

Fig. 7. Representation for 10-way accuracy classification on HUST dataset using different models with 168 training samples.

our model, particularly in scenarios with scarce data, where it still delivers outstanding scores including Accuracy, Recall, and F1
scores despite the minimal number of training samples. For instance, our proposed model demonstrates remarkable performance,
achieving an accuracy of 98.40% with only 60 training samples, and further improving to 99.91% when utilizing the full dataset of
19 800 samples. This demonstrates that our model is not only effective but also highly adaptable to low-data environments, making
it a strong candidate for real-world applications with limited data availability.
For pairwise model comparison using the Wilcoxon signed-rank test, the p-values for comparison between the proposed model
and the aforementioned methods are smaller than 0.05 in most cases, especially with 19 800 training samples (𝑝 = 0.0002 when
evaluating with QS-Former, 𝑝 = 0.0019 when compared with Ensemble-Net and SA-CovMNet). The results indicate that the observed
differences are statistically significant and unlikely due to chance, further highlighting the superior performance of the proposed
SC-MambaFew compared to other state-of-the-art models.
14

Computers and Electrical Engineering 123 (2025) 110004

G.-B. Truong et al.

Table 3
Comparison on the CWRU dataset for 1-shot and 5-shot cases using (a) 60 training samples, (b) 300 training samples, and (c)
19 800 training samples. The p-value represents the results of Wilcoxon signed-rank test between the proposed method and the
compared methods.
(a) 60 training samples
Method

CovaMNet [20]
SA-CovaMNet [21]
MF-Net [49]
QS-Former [24]
Ensemble-Net [23]
Proposed

Params (M)↓ FLOPS (G)↓

0.112
0.160
0.062
0.175
0.147
0.140

15.23 × 10−3
15.88 × 10−3
14.77 × 10−3
14.06 × 10−3
14.52 × 10−3
13.38 × 10−3

Accuracy↑

Recall↑

F1↑

1-shot 5-shot

1-shot 5-shot

1-shot 5-shot

1-shot

5-shot

92.16
92.56
94.13
92.14
96.82
97.73

92.20
92.99
93.17
83.82
94.82
97.74

92.16
92.77
93.64
87.78
95.81
97.73

0.013
0.009
0.085
0.012
0.037

0.039
0.031
0.025
0.042
0.060

93.41
92.01
95.61
94.11
98.23
98.40

93.33
95.00
95.93
93.56
97.6
98.25

p-value ↓

93.37
93.48
95.77
93.83
97.91
98.32

(b) 300 training samples
Method

CovaMNet [20]
SA-CovaMNet [21]
MF-Net [49]
QS-Former [24]
Ensemble-Net [23]
Proposed

Params (M)↓ FLOPS (G)↓

0.112
0.160
0.062
0.175
0.147
0.140

15.23 × 10−3
15.88 × 10−3
14.77 × 10−3
14.06 × 10−3
14.52 × 10−3
13.38 × 10−3

Accuracy↑

Recall↑

F1↑

1-shot 5-shot

1-shot 5-shot

1-shot 5-shot

1-shot

5-shot

95.98
95.99
99.51
98.21
99.61
99.73

95.66
93.86
98.34
98.34
98.93
99.47

95.82
94.91
98.92
98.27
99.29
97.48

0.0012
0.024
0.0002
0.0006
0.003

0.0004
0.0006
0.04
0.0021
0.0003

99.01
98.72
99.56
98.14
99.14
99.87

98.93
99.21
99.09
98.93
98.98
99.47

p-value ↓

98.97
98.96
99.32
98.53
98.56
97.75

(c) 19 800 training samples
Method

CovaMNet [20]
SA-CovaMNet [21]
MF-Net [49]
QS-Former [24]
Ensemble-Net [23]
Proposed

Params (M)↓ FLOPS (G)↓

0.112
0.160
0.062
0.175
0.147
0.140

15.23 × 10−3
15.88 × 10−3
14.77 × 10−3
14.06 × 10−3
14.52 × 10−3
13.38 × 10−3

Accuracy↑

Recall↑

F1↑

1-shot 5-shot

1-shot 5-shot

1-shot 5-shot

1-shot

5-shot

99.88
99.88
99.89
99.63
99.89
99.80

99.60
99.12
99.47
99.87
99.20
99.87

99.74
99.49
98.63
99.75
95.81
99.87

0.0037
0.0019
0.0047
0.0002
0.0006

0.0014
0.0039
0.0488
0.0013
0.0019

99.67
99.81
99.73
99.53
99.76
99.91

98.40
97.47
99.27
99.12
98.67
100

p-value ↓

99.02
98.62
99.50
99.32
99.21
99.95

Regarding computational complexity, as shown in the second and third columns of Table 3 , the number of training parameters for
the proposed model is comparable to those of CovaMNet, SA-CovaMNet, QS-Former, and Ensemble-Net, but slightly higher than MFNet (0.14 million vs. 0.062 millions). However, in terms of FLOPS, the proposed SC-MambaFew demonstrates lower computational
complexity (13.38 × 10−3 Gigaflops) compared to other state-of-the-art models, including CovaMNet (15.23 × 10−3 ), SA-CovaMNet
(15.88 × 10−3 ), MF-Net (14.77 × 10−3 ), QS-Former (14.06 × 10−3 ), and Ensemble-Net (14.52 × 10−3 Gigaflops).
Visualization techniques, such as the confusion matrix and t-SNE, were employed in our experiments to further demonstrate the
effectiveness of the proposed SC-MambaFew method. The confusion matrix and t-SNE plots for the case with as few as 30 training
samples using 1-shot on the CWRU dataset are presented in Fig. 8 offering a visual comparison of the proposed model’s performance
against other approaches. The t-SNE visualization in Fig. 8 highlights the distribution of data points for the proposed approach,
showcasing a more distinct and well-separated clustering of fault categories compared to other methods. This clear separation
underscores the model’s ability to extract more discriminative features, contributing to its superior classification performance.
Additionally, the confusion matrix confirms the model’s higher classification accuracy of our model, with fewer misclassifications
observed relative to competing models. However, some misclassifications remain, particularly between the fault categories ‘‘0.014
Inner Race’’ and ‘‘0.021 Ball’’, which are occasionally confused with ‘‘0.007 Ball’’. This confusion is likely due to the high level of
noise present in the data during collection.
4.4. Ablation study
To further validate the performance enhancements brought by our proposed model in fault-bearing diagnosis tasks, we conducted
an ablation study under varying training conditions. Our contributions primarily include three modules: the GL-Mamba for spatial
attention, based on the Mamba architecture [40]; the GLCA for channel-dimension attention extraction; and the Selective Channel
(SC) module, which uses a weighted-attention vector to selectively choose feature maps that are then fed into the covariance metric
layer.
As shown in Table 4, we designed eight experimental cases (𝛥1 – 𝛥8 )to demonstrate the effectiveness of our model. The first
case (𝛥1 ) serves as a baseline, where feature maps from the ConvMixPP and MLKFE modules are combined by summing them. The
baseline model achieves accuracies of 79.73% and 70.86% on the CWRU and HUST datasets, respectively, under limited training
samples (30 for CWRU and 168 for HUST). These results underscore the need for more robust mechanisms for feature extraction
and attention.
In case (𝛥2 ), we introduced the GL-Mamba module in the upper branch, leading to noticeable accuracy improvements of 2% to
9% across all training sample conditions. Similarly, in 𝛥3 , implementing the GLCA module in the lower branch also contributed to
15

Computers and Electrical Engineering 123 (2025) 110004

G.-B. Truong et al.

Fig. 8. Representation for 10-way accuracy classification on CWRU when using different models with only 30 training samples.

Table 4
Ablation study of different components of the proposed model on the HUST Bearing and CWRU datasets, using the Accuracy metric under varying training
samples in the 1-shot scenario.
Baseline

𝛥1
𝛥2
𝛥3
𝛥4
𝛥5
𝛥6
𝛥7
𝛥8

✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓

GL-Mamba

GLCA

SC

✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓

✓
✓
✓

✓
✓
✓

Params(M)↓

0.104
0.127
0.104
0.117
0.127
0.140
0.117
0.140

FLOPS(G)↓

11.18 × 10−3
11.25 × 10−3
11.88 × 10−3
11.88 × 10−3
11.43 × 10−3
12.05 × 10−3
12.13 × 10−3
13.38 × 10−3

HUST dataset

CWRU dataset

168

840

16 800

30

60

19 800

70.86
82.67
80.48
77.14
84.06
81.38
82.52
86.15

90.76
90.57
90.86
95.43
90.29
97.43
98.19
98.71

99.35
99.46
99.25
99.14
99.56
99.71
99.62
99.76

79.73
81.20
80.67
82.23
82.53
83.01
81.63
86.80

89.87
93.93
94.07
94.37
95.73
95.63
96.89
97.73

99.47
99.53
98.00
99.47
99.73
99.65
99.77
99.80

significant accuracy gains. These results highlight the critical role of both spatial and channel-dimension attention mechanisms in
enhancing spectrum feature representation, as shown in 𝛥5 with better performance.
When using only the Selective Channel to integrate the information from the baseline, our model achieves an accuracy of
82.53% for 30 samples with the CWRU dataset and 77.14% for 168 samples with the HUST bearing dataset. These results show a
slight improvement over using only the baseline in 𝛥5 .
In the (𝛥6 ) and (𝛥7 ), when incorporating the Selective Channel module, we observed further performance boosts, achieving
accuracies of 99.77% and 99.71% on the full CWRU and HUST datasets, respectively. The Selective Channel module proves highly
effective in assigning weighted-attention scores for each channel, enabling better feature selection from the two branches.
Ultimately, our model achieves its best performance when all proposed modules are combined (𝛥8 ), as seen with accuracies
of 86.80% with only 30 samples and 99.91% with the full CWRU dataset, and 86.15% with 168 samples and 99.76% with the
full training samples of HUST dataset. These results underscore the efficacy of the covariance metric and the importance of the
feature extraction stage. By leveraging informative feature maps, our model significantly enhances classification performance, further
solidifying its value for tasks like fault-bearing diagnosis.
The computational complexity of the ablation study, which examines the Baseline and various combinations of the proposed
GL-Mamba, GLCA, and SC blocks is shown in the ‘Params’ and ’FLOPS columns of Table 4. As shown in the table, the number
of training parameters for the proposed model, when utilizing the full set of modules (GL-Mamba, GLCA, and SC blocks) is 0.14
millions. This is only slightly higher than the Baseline and the case with GLCA alone (both 0.104 million), the model with the
SC module ablated (0.127 million), or the model without the GL-Mamba module (0.117 million). It is worth mentioning that the
GLCA module adds only 12 parameters, so the total number of parameters in the model (in millions) remains unchanged when the
GLCA is removed or ablated. Regarding FLOPS, the full model incorporating all proposed modules has the highest computational
complexity (13.38 × 10−3 Gigaflops). Notably, the proposed model achieves only 2.2 × 10−3 Gigaflops higher than the Baseline
(11.18 × 10−3 Gigaflops), while significantly improving accuracy, particularly under limited data scenarios. For example, on the
16

Computers and Electrical Engineering 123 (2025) 110004

G.-B. Truong et al.

HUST dataset with 168 training samples, the proposed model achieves an Accuracy of 86.15%, compared to just 70.86% for the
Baseline. Similarly impressive results are observed with 30 training samples of CWRU data, where the full model achieves 86.80%
accuracy. In contrast, ablating the GL-Mmaba module results in 81.63%, and removing both the GL-Mamba and SC blocks yields
86.67% accuracy.
5. Conclusion
In this research, we present the SC-MambaFew framework, a novel few-shot learning approach for bearing fault diagnosis,
utilizing a Mamba-based architecture with dual-attention mechanisms: Mamba attention (GL-Mamba module) and Channel Attention
(GLCA module). These mechanisms allow the model to effectively capture both local and global information across spatial and
channel dimensions. The introduction of the Selective Channel (SC) mechanism further refines feature extraction by selectively
weighting the importance of channels based on their relevance. Extensive experiments on the HUST and the Case Western Reserve
University (CWRU) bearing datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed model, especially in limited data scenarios.
Specifically, when trained with as few as 168 samples on the HUST dataset in the 1-shot scenario, the model achieves an accuracy of
86.15%, a recall of 87.89%, and an F1 score of 87.7%. For the CWRU dataset, even with only 60 training samples, the model achieves
97.73% Accuracy, 97.74% Recall, and 97.73% F1 score. The performance of the proposed SC-MambaFew method is further validated
by statistical significance testing using the Wilcoxon signed-rank test, with p-values consistently smaller than 0.05, confirming the
superior performance of the proposed SC-MambaFew when compared to existing models. The promising results of the proposed
approach suggest its potential for real-world industrial applications, particularly in situations with limited labeled data. Future work
will focus on domain adaptation techniques to enable the model to generalize across different types of error signals in industrial
settings without requiring large labeled datasets. Moreover, we plan to optimize the model for real-time fault diagnosis in resourceconstrained environments, ensuring fast and efficient processing. Additionally, we aim to explore the applicability of SC-MambaFew
for diagnosing faults in other industrial machinery components, broadening its utility across different diagnostic contexts.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest in this work.
Acknowledgment
This research is funded by the Vietnam National Foundation for Science and Technology Development (NAFOSTED) under grant
number 102.05-2021.34.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary material related to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compeleceng.2024.110004.
Data availability
Our code will be made publicly available at: https://github.com/giabao804/few-shot-mamba.git.

References
[1] Ying W, Zheng J, Huang W, Tong J, Pan H, Li Y. Order-frequency holo-Hilbert spectral analysis for machinery fault diagnosis under time-varying operating
conditions. ISA Trans 2024;146:472–83.
[2] Singh G, Naikan V. Partial broken rotor bar fault diagnosis using signal injected and generated Hilbert method. Comput Electr Eng 2023;111:108935.
[3] Noble WS. What is a support vector machine? Nat Biotechnol 2006;24(12):1565–7.
[4] Feng Z, Zhang Z. A small sample rolling bearing fault diagnosis based on PSD-VME and DS evidence theory enhanced mRVM. Comput Electr Eng
2024;118:109458.
[5] Guo G, Wang H, Bell D, Bi Y, Greer K. KNN model-based approach in classification. In: On the move to meaningful internet systems 2003: coopIS,
DOA, and ODBASE: OTM confederated international conferences, coopIS, DOA, and oDBASE 2003, catania, sicily, Italy, November 3-7, 2003. proceedings.
Springer; 2003, p. 986–96.
[6] Zheng X, Huang Y, Xin Y, Zhang Z, Liu W, Liu D. Sparse measure of bearing fault features based on Legendre wavelet multi-scale multi-mode entropy.
Comput Electr Eng 2024;116:109204.
[7] Graves A, Graves A. Long short-term memory. In: Supervised Sequence Labelling with Recurrent Neural Networks. Springer; 2012, p. 37–45.
[8] Pang Y, Jia L, Zhang X, Liu Z, Li D. Design and implementation of automatic fault diagnosis system for wind turbine. Comput Electr Eng 2020;87:106754.
[9] Wu J. Introduction to convolutional neural networks. Natl Key Lab Novel Softw Technol Nanjing Univ China 2017;5(23):495.
[10] Lv K, Jiang H, Fu S, Du T, Jin X, Fan X. A predictive analytics framework for rolling bearing vibration signal using deep learning and time series
techniques. Comput Electr Eng 2024;117:109314.
[11] Huang J, Wu G, Liu X, Bu M, Qiao W. Fault diagnosis of planetary gearboxes under variable operating conditions based on AWM-TCN. Comput Electr
Eng 2024;119:109520.
[12] Chen X, Yang R, Xue Y, Huang M, Ferrero R, Wang Z. Deep transfer learning for bearing fault diagnosis: A systematic review since 2016. IEEE Trans
Instrum Meas 2023;72:1–21.
[13] Misbah I, Lee CK, Keung KL. Fault diagnosis in rotating machines based on transfer learning: Literature review. Knowl-Based Syst 2024;283:111158.
17

Computers and Electrical Engineering 123 (2025) 110004

G.-B. Truong et al.

[14] Koch G, Zemel R, Salakhutdinov R, et al. Siamese neural networks for one-shot image recognition. In: ICML deep learning workshop. Vol. 2, Lille; 2015,
p. 1–30, no. 1.
[15] Zhang A, Li S, Cui Y, Yang W, Dong R, Hu J. Limited data rolling bearing fault diagnosis with few-shot learning. IEEE Access 2019;7:110895–904.
[16] Vu M-H, Nguyen V-Q, Tran T-T, Pham V-T. A new ConvMixer-based approach for diagnosis of fault bearing using signal spectrum. In: Conference on
information technology and its applications. Springer; 2023, p. 3–14.
[17] Li W, Wang S, Lu J, Feng J, Zhou J. Meta-mining discriminative samples for kinship verification. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition. 2021, p. 16135–44.
[18] Shen H, Zhao D, Wang L, Liu Q. Bearing fault diagnosis based on prototypical network. In: International conference on mechatronics engineering and
artificial intelligence. MEAI 2022, Vol. 12596, SPIE; 2023, p. 79–84.
[19] Wang H, Wang X, Yang Y, Gryllias K, Liu Z. A few-shot machinery fault diagnosis framework based on self-supervised signal representation learning. IEEE
Trans Instrum Meas 2024.
[20] Li W, Xu J, Huo J, Wang L, Gao Y, Luo J. Distribution consistency based covariance metric networks for few-shot learning. In: Proceedings of the AAAI
conference on artificial intelligence. Vol. 33, 2019, p. 8642–9, no. 01.
[21] Zhai J, Han L, Xiao Y, Yan M, Wang Y, Wang X. Few-shot fine-grained fish species classification via sandwich attention CovaMNet. Front Mar Sci
2023;10:1149186.
[22] Li W, Wang L, Xu J, Huo J, Gao Y, Luo J. Revisiting local descriptor based image-to-class measure for few-shot learning. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 2019, p. 7260–8.
[23] Vu M-H, Nguyen V-Q, Tran T-T, Pham V-T, Lo M-T. Few-shot bearing fault diagnosis via ensembling transformer-based model with mahalanobis distance
metric learning from multiscale features. IEEE Trans Instrum Meas 2024.
[24] Wang X, Wang X, Jiang B, Luo B. Few-shot learning meets transformer: Unified query-support transformers for few-shot classification. IEEE Trans Circuits
Syst Video Technol 2023;33(12):7789–802.
[25] Wang G, Liu D, Cui L. Auto-embedding transformer for interpretable few-shot fault diagnosis of rolling bearings. IEEE Trans Reliab 2023.
[26] Han G, Ma J, Huang S, Chen L, Chang S-F. Few-shot object detection with fully cross-transformer. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition. 2022, p. 5321–30.
[27] Gu A, Goel K, Ré C. Efficiently modeling long sequences with structured state spaces. 2021, arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.00396.
[28] Gu A, Dao T. Mamba: Linear-time sequence modeling with selective state spaces. 2023, arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.00752.
[29] Zhu L, Liao B, Zhang Q, Wang X, Liu W, Wang X. Vision mamba: Efficient visual representation learning with bidirectional state space model. 2024, arXiv
preprint arXiv:2401.09417.
[30] Liu Y, Tian Y, Zhao Y, Yu H, Xie L, Wang Y, Ye Q, Liu Y. Vmamba: Visual state space model. 2024, arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.10166.
[31] Ma J, Li F, Wang B. U-mamba: Enhancing long-range dependency for biomedical image segmentation. 2024, arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.04722.
[32] Liao W, Zhu Y, Wang X, Pan C, Wang Y, Ma L. Lightm-unet: Mamba assists in lightweight unet for medical image segmentation. 2024, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2403.05246.
[33] Nguyen V-T, Pham V-T, Tran T-T. AC-MambaSeg: An adaptive convolution and mamba-based architecture for enhanced skin lesion segmentation. 2024,
arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.03011.
[34] Trockman A, Kolter JZ. Patches are all you need? 2022, arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.09792.
[35] Dosovitskiy A, Beyer L, Kolesnikov A, Weissenborn D, Zhai X, Unterthiner T, Dehghani M, Minderer M, Heigold G, Gelly S, et al. An image is worth
16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. 2020, arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.11929.
[36] Tolstikhin IO, Houlsby N, Kolesnikov A, Beyer L, Zhai X, Unterthiner T, Yung J, Steiner A, Keysers D, Uszkoreit J, et al. Mlp-mixer: An all-mlp architecture
for vision. Adv Neural Inf Process Syst 2021;34:24261–72.
[37] He K, Zhang X, Ren S, Sun J. Deep residual learning for image recognition. In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition. 2016, p. 770–8.
[38] Snell J, Swersky K, Zemel R. Prototypical networks for few-shot learning. Adv Neural Inf Process Syst 2017;30.
[39] Sung F, Yang Y, Zhang L, Xiang T, Torr PH, Hospedales TM. Learning to compare: Relation network for few-shot learning. In: Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 2018, p. 1199–208.
[40] Yue Y, Li Z. Medmamba: Vision mamba for medical image classification. 2024, arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.03849.
[41] De Boer JF, Cense B, Park BH, Pierce MC, Tearney GJ, Bouma BE. Improved signal-to-noise ratio in spectral-domain compared with time-domain optical
coherence tomography. Opt Lett 2003;28(21):2067–9.
[42] Le TV, Tran T-T, Pham V-T, et al. Attention ConvMixer model and application for fish species classification. EAI Endorsed Trans Ind Netw Intell Syst
2023;10(3). e2–e2.
[43] Song CH, Han HJ, Avrithis Y. All the attention you need: Global-local, spatial-channel attention for image retrieval. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
winter conference on applications of computer vision. 2022, p. 2754–63.
[44] Li X, Wang W, Hu X, Yang J. Selective kernel networks. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 2019,
p. 510–9.
[45] Thuan ND, Hong HS. HUST bearing: a practical dataset for ball bearing fault diagnosis. BMC Res Notes 2023;16(1):138.
[46] Smith WA, Randall RB. Rolling element bearing diagnostics using the case western reserve university data: A benchmark study. Mech Syst Signal Process
2015;64:100–31.
[47] Woolson RF. Wilcoxon signed-rank test. Ency Biostat 2005;8.
[48] Demvsar J. Statistical comparisons of classifiers over multiple data sets. J Mach Learn Res 2006;7:1–30.
[49] Vu M-H, Pham V-T. MixerFormer-covariance metric neural network: A new few-shot learning model for bearing fault diagnosis. In: 2023 12th international
conference on control, automation and information sciences. ICCAIS, IEEE; 2023, p. 639–44.

18

