6156

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 34, NO. 7, JULY 2025

Wavelet and Adaptive Coordinate Attention Guided
Fine-Grained Residual Network
for Image Denoising
Shifei Ding , Member, IEEE, Qidong Wang , Lili Guo , Member, IEEE, Xuan Li,
Ling Ding, and Xindong Wu , Fellow, IEEE
Abstract— Convolutional neural networks (CNN) have
achieved remarkable performance in image denoising. However,
most existing CNNs cannot accurately capture and remove
tiny noises during the denoising process and lose edge detail
information easily. In this paper, we propose a fine-grained
residual network guided by wavelet and adaptive coordinate
attention (WACAFRN) for image denoising. Firstly, we propose
an adaptive coordinate attention mechanism and combine it
with cascaded Res2Net residual blocks to form an encoder
network for more accurate noise removal. Secondly, we propose
a wavelet attention mechanism that combines global and local
residual blocks to form a decoder network, aiming to address the
problem of edge detail information loss. At last, we complement
the noise information through a noise estimation block to
further enhance the model’s ability to adapt to noise. Extensive
experiment results demonstrate that our proposed method
outperforms existing denoising methods in both qualitative and
quantitative aspects. Notably, our method significantly improves
real-world noise removal tasks on the CC dataset, with an
average increase of 2.08 dB in PSNR and 0.0264 in SSIM over
the state-of-the-art methods. Additionally, WACAFRN exhibits
faster inference speeds, underscoring its efficiency in real-world
applications.
Index Terms— Image denoising, wavelet attention, adaptive
coordinate attention, noise estimation, residual connection.

I

I. I NTRODUCTION
MAGE denoising is one of the key tasks in the field of
computer vision and is of vital significance [1], [2], [3].

Manuscript received 27 August 2023; revised 2 November 2023 and
1 December 2023; accepted 24 December 2023. Date of publication 1 January
2024; date of current version 3 July 2024. This work was supported by
the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No.62276265
and Grant No.61976216. This article was recommended by Associate Editor
T. Akilan. (Corresponding authors: Lili Guo; Xuan Li.)
Shifei Ding is with the School of Computer Science and Technology,
China University of Mining and Technology, Xuzhou 221116, China, and
also with the Mine Digitization Engineering Research Center of Ministry of
Education of the People’s Republic of China, Xuzhou 221116, China (e-mail:
dingsf@cumt.edu.cn).
Qidong Wang, Lili Guo, and Xuan Li are with the School of Computer Science and Technology, China University of Mining and Technology,
Xuzhou 221116, China (e-mail: 1730853234@qq.com; liliguo@cumt.edu.cn;
lixuan23@cumt.edu.cn).
Ling Ding is with the College of Computing and Intelligence, Tianjin
University, Tianjin 300350, China (e-mail: dingling940516@foxmail.com).
Xindong Wu is with the Research Center for Knowledge
Engineering, Zhejiang Laboratory, Hangzhou 311121, China (e-mail:
xwu@zhejianglab.com).
Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TCSVT.2023.3348804.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSVT.2023.3348804

Images contain a wealth of information that can help people
understand and comprehend the world around them. However,
external factors such as harsh environmental conditions, technical defects in the image capture process, and human factors
can lead to image quality degradation and destruction, which
in turn affects people’s acquisition and use of the information.
Hence, removing noise to obtain high-quality images is a
significant and ongoing challenge [4].
In the past few decades, significant advancements have
been made in the field of image denoising research [5], [6].
Traditional image denoising methods mainly include spatial
domain filtering methods [7], frequency domain filtering methods [8], methods based on Partial Differential Equations (PDE)
[9], and non-local self-similar methods [10]. These methods
are effective in noise removal and image restoration, but the
computational complexity is high, and the process of adjusting
parameters is difficult.
Some specific algorithms, such as Non-Local Means (NLM)
[11], Weighted Nuclear Norm Minimization (WNNM) [12],
and Block-Matching and 3D Filtering (BM3D) [13], all use
similar strategies to find and utilize similar structures in
images. These methods can better preserve the structure and
detailed information of the image, but the computational
complexity is high, which may pose challenges to application
scenarios with high real-time requirements.
The powerful learning capabilities of deep learning models present a particularly promising research area for image
denoising. Jian et al. [14] demonstrate the effectiveness of
gradient-based convolutional networks in restoring noisy and
degraded images. The Multi-layer Perceptron (MLP) proposed
by Burger et al. [15] can achieve a good noise reduction effect
but the receptive field is limited. Schmidt et al. [16] proposed
the Shrink Field Cascade (CSF) model to improve computational efficiency and image restoration quality. Chen et al. [17]
proposed the TNRD model, which can be adapted to various
restoration tasks. Daniel et al. [18] used the Gaussian mixture
model to analyze image blocks and proposed the EPLL
denoising method. Zhang et al. [19] proposed DnCNN, the first
deep CNN-based Gaussian denoising method, which remains
an important benchmark for the design of image denoising
methods due to its excellent design and the concept of residual
learning. Building on this work, Zhang et al. [20] proposed
FFDNet, which utilizes noise level maps and noisy images to
improve adaptability to noise. Subsequently, Zhang et al. [21]

1051-8215 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: WUHAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on August 16,2025 at 23:58:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DING et al.: WACAFRN FOR IMAGE DENOISING

also developed IRCNN, a set of CNN-denoising networks for
image denoising.
RIDNet [22] is a denoising method that combines feature
attention and residual connection, which has great advantages
in real image denoising tasks but has the disadvantage of
over-smoothing. Tian et al. [23] proposed ADNet, which
uses a dilated convolution-based sparse mechanism and an
attention mechanism. Later, they proposed a dual CNN [24] for
image denoising. Ma et al. [25] introduced the deep boosting
strategy to the field of image denoising, which achieved
advanced results. Jiang et al. [26] proposed an adaptive prior
image denoising method, which improved the image denoising
effect by introducing two regularization priors and achieved
excellent performance. Zamir et al. [27] proposed an efficient transformer model for high-resolution image restoration,
achieving outstanding results on multiple restoration tasks.
Tian et al. [28] proposed a multi-stage image denoising method
combined with wavelet transform to speed up training and
improve denoising performance.
Although researchers have achieved superior image denoising effects using deep convolutional neural networks, existing
methods still struggle with accurately locating and learning
noise during the denoising process. This limitation often leads
to the loss of edge information in the denoising results.
To overcome the above problems, in this paper, we propose
a fine-grained residual denoising network guided by wavelet
and adaptive coordinate attention. Specifically, we propose an
enhancement to deep denoising networks, integrating an adaptive coordinate attention mechanism with stacked fine-grained
residual blocks in the encoder for better noise learning, and a
wavelet attention mechanism in the decoder layer for improved
image edge restoration. Additionally, we introduce a noise
estimation sub-network for prior knowledge guidance and
a feature fusion block for integrating the estimated noise
with the channel noise map for refined noise mapping. Our
experimental results demonstrate that our method, named
WACAFRN, effectively enhances network denoising abilities
and the quality of restored images. To sum up, this paper
mainly has the following contributions:
To more accurately capture and learn fine noise points,
we propose an adaptive coordinate attention mechanism
(ACA), which is combined with stacked fine-grained
residual blocks to form an encoder layer. ACA guidance can adaptively learn attention intensities to accurately extract noise information at different encoder
layers.
• To preserve image edge information more effectively and
improve the quality of image restoration, we propose a
wavelet attention mechanism (WA), which is combined
with global and local residual connections to form a
decoder layer. WA guidance helps preserve detailed edge
information in images.
• Based on introducing ACA at the encoder layer and
WA at the decoder layer respectively, we design a noise
estimation block (NEB) to complement the noise prior
information, and by combining the encoder-decoder backbone network and the noise estimation block, we propose

•

6157

the wavelet and adaptive coordinate attention guided
fine-grained residual denoising network.
• Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method significantly improves the denoising ability of the network
and the quality of restored images.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.
Section II presents some work related to our method. We detail
our proposed WACAFRN in Section III. In Section IV,
we organize extensive experiments to demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method and compare it with the
existing state-of-the-art methods. Finally, in Section V, we provide a summary and outlook of our work.
II. R ELATED W ORK
A. Coordinate Attention
Coordinate Attention [29] is an attention mechanism for
computer vision tasks that introduces positional spatial information on feature maps such that attention weights depend not
only on feature similarity within a channel but also on feature
differences between different positions. Coordinate Attention
has achieved excellent performance in many computer vision
tasks, especially in object detection, image segmentation, and
human pose estimation. These facts clearly show that the
power and efficiency of Coordinate Attention in image tasks
are very competitive. Based on this reality, we propose an
adaptive coordinate attention mechanism for image denoising
to capture and remove fine noise more accurately.
B. Wavelet Transform
In image denoising, the wavelet transform [30] is used
to remove noise from an image by thresholding the wavelet
coefficients in high-frequency subbands. In feature extraction,
wavelet transform is used to capture the multi-scale and multidirectional features of images, which can be used for further
image analysis. Liu et al. [31] proposed a multilevel waveletCNN (MWCNN) architecture for image restoration, which
combines the invertibility, frequency, and location properties of
the wavelet transform to help image restoration. Tian et al. [28]
proposed a multi-stage image denoising algorithm combined
with wavelet transform to enhance the feature information
extracted from the original CNN block and use the wavelet
transform to improve the denoising effect. Huang et al. [32]
proposed a wavelet-inspired invertible network (WINNet)
aimed at combining the advantages of wavelet transformation
and learning-based methods, while simultaneously enhancing
interpretability. Inspired by the above, we introduced wavelet
transformation in the decoding stage. Unlike the previous
approach, we devised a more effective wavelet attention
mechanism.
C. Res2Net
Res2Net is a convolutional neural network architecture for
image recognition [33]. Different from traditional convolutional neural networks, each ResBlock in Res2Net contains
multiple branches with different feature map sizes but shares
the same number of feature map channels. This design enables

Authorized licensed use limited to: WUHAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on August 16,2025 at 23:58:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6158

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 34, NO. 7, JULY 2024

Fig. 1. The architecture of WACAFRN proposed for image denoising. WACAFRN consists of five components: PFEB, FGE, WARD, NEB, and FRB.
Noisy images are initially parallelly fed into the PFEB and NEB blocks. After processing through the PFEB block, basic features are obtained, and further
channel feature maps are extracted through the FGE and reconstructed using WARD. The branch processed by the NEB block corresponds to the generation
of estimated noise maps. Finally, the FRB fuses the features from both branches and achieves denoising through residual learning.

Res2Net to make full use of feature information of different
scales and levels. Encouraged by these facts, in this study,
we propose a fine-grained feature extraction network by stacking Res2Net blocks and combining them with an adaptive
coordinate attention mechanism for image denoising tasks.
D. Noise Estimation
Noise estimation is a very important technique in deep
learning-based image denoising [34]. The advantage of using
noise estimation is that the parameters of the denoising model
can be adaptively adjusted according to the different noise
levels of the image. The method adopted by FFDNet [20]
is to combine the global noise map and the noisy subgraph
as input, which is a way of combination in the early stage.
The noise estimation subnetwork and denoising network in
CBDNet [35] are jointly trained. It also combines the noise
map and the noisy input as the input of the denoising
network. The recently proposed denoising diffusion models,
DDPM [36] and Repaint [37], have the capability to achieve
advanced noise estimation results. However, they require a
significant number of computational resources and have large
model sizes. Inspired by these works, we propose a noise
estimation block to estimate noise information, which is then
fused with the output of the backbone network to improve
denoising performance. It’s important to note that, considering
factors such as computational cost and model size, we have
not employed denoising diffusion models for noise estimation.
Instead, noise estimation serves as a supplementary role,
aiming for lightweight and easy-to-train solutions.
III. T HE P ROPOSED M ETHOD
In this part, we describe our proposed method in detail.
WACAFRN mainly consists of five parts, which we explain

one by one in each subsection. First, in Section A, we introduce the overall framework of our model. Then, we describe
the proposed primary feature extraction block (PFEB) in detail
in Section B. Section C introduces the fine-grained encoder
(FGE). A detailed introduction to the wavelet attention residual
decoder (WARD) is in Section D. Section E introduces the
NEB. Finally, Section F introduces the fusion reconstruction
block (FRB).
A. Network Architecture
The WACAFRN proposed in this study consists of five
parts: PFEB, FGE, WARD, NEB, and FRB as shown in Fig. 1.
The PFEB block aims to increase the receptive field and
feature extraction range of the network and provide sufficient
shallow feature information for subsequent modules. It should
be noted that WACAFRN is a two-branch convolutional neural
network. In addition to being input to PFEB, the noisy image
will also be passed to NEB in parallel to learn and extract
global noise estimation information.
The backbone of the model is an asymmetric encoderdecoder structure designed to extract and learn the main
channel noise feature maps. The encoding part is a fine-grained
encoder, which achieves fine feature extraction by stacking
Res2Net blocks and combining adaptive coordinate attention
mechanism, which can capture and learn fine noise information
that is difficult to obtain by traditional convolutional neural
networks. During the encoding process, as we incorporate
down-sampling, the image’s resolution undergoes a gradual
reduction, resulting in a more concentrated and crucial extraction of feature information. The decoding part is a wavelet
attention residual decoder, which combines the global local
residual connection and the wavelet attention mechanism and
weights the channels through the features of the frequency

Authorized licensed use limited to: WUHAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on August 16,2025 at 23:58:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DING et al.: WACAFRN FOR IMAGE DENOISING

6159

Fig. 2. Detailed structural illustration of PFEB. PFEB consists of three
convolution/dilated convolution layers designed for extracting initial features.

domain, which can reduce the information loss while retaining
the edge details of the image. At the same time, the quality of
image restoration can be improved. NEB can obtain a global
noise map by modeling and learning noisy images, which will
provide more information about noise distribution and noise
categories for the final noise map. FRB uses a residual learning
strategy to fuse channel noise maps and noise estimate maps
and combine them to get the final merged noise map. Finally,
a clean image is obtained by subtracting the combined noise
map from the model’s input (the noisy image).
B. Primary Feature Extraction Block
The first part of WACAFRN is the primary feature extraction block, used to provide initial shallow-level feature
information. The primary feature extraction block consists of
three layers: a convolutional layer, a dilated convolutional
layer with a dilation factor of 2, and a convolutional layer.
The detailed structural illustration of PFEB is shown in Fig. 2.
In Fig. 2, the input of the PFEB block is a noisy image, and
the output is the extracted primary feature map. To observe the
extracted features more intuitively, the output feature map is
displayed in the form of thermodynamic images. By observing
Fig. 2, it can be found that the primary feature map extracted
by PFEB can cover most of the noise positions and provide
better shallow features for the model. The realization of these
can be represented by the following formula:
O P F E B = f C2 ( f D1 ( f C1 (N ))) ,

(1)

where N is the input noise image, f C1 denotes the function of
the first convolutional layer, f D1 is the function of the second
convolutional layer and is the function of the first dilated
convolutional layer, and f C2 is the function of the second convolutional layer.
C. Fine-Grained Encoder
To effectively extract finer-grained noise information and
remove as much noise as possible, we design a fine-grained
encoder, which is composed of three fine-grained encoding
layers (FGEL). Each FGEL contains the following operations:
changing the convolution of the feature channel, a finegrained feature extraction block composed of stacked Res2Net
blocks and an adaptive coordinate attention mechanism, and
down-sampling to reduce the image resolution. The processing
process of FGE can be expressed as follows:
 


 
O F G E = f S3 f 3 f S2 f 2 f S1 f 1 (O P F E B )
,
(2)

Fig. 3.
Illustration of our proposed ACA module. Specifically, firstly,
adaptive average pooling is applied separately to the input feature map in
both horizontal and width directions. Subsequently, the results of these two
adaptive average pooling operations undergo transformations such as MLP
and adjustment of attention intensity factors. Finally, the results from both
directions are summed, and attention weights are generated through a sigmoid
function.

where O P F E B is the output of PFEB, f 1 , f 2 , and f 3 are
convolution functions that respectively represent the number of
channels changed from 64 to 64, 64 to 128, and 128 to 256,
f S1 , f S2 , and f S3 are fine-grained feature extraction blocks
and O F G E is the output of FGE. The structure of the adaptive
coordinate attention mechanism is shown in Fig. 3, and the
structural illustration of the fine-grained encoder is shown in
Fig. 4.
To guide the fine-grained feature extraction network to
better capture and extract fine noise, we propose an adaptive
coordinate attention mechanism. Unlike conventional channel attention, the adaptive coordinate attention mechanism
highlights important information in images by adaptively calculating attention weights. It utilizes adaptive average pooling
operations to compute the mean values of the image in both
the vertical and horizontal directions. These mean values are
then processed through convolutional layers and activation
functions. Subsequently, by adjusting adaptive scaling factors,
the feature maps from the vertical and horizontal directions
are weighted and combined. Finally, the attention weights are
constrained between 0 and 1 using the Sigmoid function. This
adaptive attention weight calculation enables the model to
automatically learn important regions based on the characteristics of the image, emphasizing relevant information. Unlike the
original coordinate attention mechanism, we have incorporated
learnable adaptive scaling factors into the attention weight
calculation, enabling the model to adapt to different types
and levels of noise. By adjusting these scaling factors, the
model can flexibly accommodate images with varying noise
characteristics and fine-tune the degree of noise suppression
as needed. The adaptive coordinate attention mechanism can
be expressed as follows:

AC A(x) = x ∗ σ S F H M L adaptive_avg_pool H (x)
+S F W (M L (adaptive_avg_pool(x)))) ,

(3)

where x represents the input feature map, ∗ represents
element-wise multiplication, σ represents sigmoid activation
function. M L represents a shared MLP. S F H and S F W are
factors for adaptively adjusting attention in the H and W
directions, respectively, and can flexibly change the intensity
of attention through learning.

Authorized licensed use limited to: WUHAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on August 16,2025 at 23:58:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6160

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 34, NO. 7, JULY 2024

Fig. 4. Illustration of the detailed architecture of the FGE. FGE comprises
three stages of fine-grained feature extraction, implemented through stacked
Res2Net blocks and ACA. During this process, the resolution of the feature
maps gradually decreases.

Fig. 5. Illustration of the detailed architecture of WARD. WARD comprises
three iterations of residual wavelet attention reconstruction processing, which
is achieved through global-local residuals and WA. During this process, the
resolution of the feature maps gradually increases.

The core of the encoding layer is the fine-grained feature
extraction block, which consists of stacked Res2Net blocks
and an adaptive coordinate attention mechanism. Res2Net
enhances feature expression ability by segmenting and reorganizing noise features of different scales, and can better
capture small noise points. The stacked Res2Net block is
realized by cascading two Res2Net blocks, which can further
improve the representation ability of the model and extract
finer-grained noise features. The combination of adaptive
coordinate attention mechanism and stacked residual blocks
enables the network to effectively model the spatial context
of images. Res2Net blocks capture and propagate relevant
information from earlier layers, enabling the network to exploit
spatial context for denoising. An adaptive coordinate attention
mechanism further optimizes this contextual information by
focusing on specific locations and guiding the denoising process with spatially aware attention weights. By adjusting the
image resolution in combination with down-sampling, feature
combination can be performed at different image scales, which
improves the robustness to scale changes and thus improves
the denoising performance of the model.

structure is depicted in the illustration of Fig. 5. Inspired
by the wavelet transform and its application in the image
field, we propose a wavelet attention mechanism, its novelty lies in frequency domain information to weight the
feature channels, allowing for more effective preservation
of edge information during the denoising process. Specifically, the channel feature maps from the previous network
stage are decomposed using the discrete wavelet transform,
with a one-level decomposition using Daubechies wavelets.
Daubechies wavelets generate three high-frequency subbands
and one low-frequency subband, emphasizing edge details in
the horizontal, vertical, and diagonal directions. Zero-padding
is used to retain more boundary information. In the thresholding step, learnable thresholds are set, allowing for smoother
noise removal without significant loss of detail. Using normalization to maintain parameter stability. Subsequently, the
three high-frequency subbands are concatenated and fused,
followed by convolutional operations to further learn edge
details. Finally, an inverse discrete wavelet transform is applied
to reconstruct the channel feature maps.
Subsequently, the main features are extracted by employing
global average pooling (GAP) to compress the feature maps.
Then, the features are expanded using Flatten, and finally,
wavelet attention-guided weights are generated through the
Softmax function. The wavelet attention mechanism can guide
the feature learning process and better preserve image edge
information during the noise removal process. The specific
structure of wavelet attention is depicted in Fig. 1. The
working process of the wavelet attention mechanism can be
described as follows.

(H1 , H2 , H3 , L) = DW T (X, Daubechies)



H
concat = Concatenate(H1 , H2 , H3 )

X
re = IDWT(L , Convolution(Hconcat , Daubechies))



Final_features = Softmax(Flatten(GAP(X re ))) × X,
(4)

D. Wavelet Attention Residual Decoder
The wavelet attention residual decoder proposed in this
paper is mainly realized by up-sampling operation, convolutional layer, global and local residual blocks, and wavelet
attention mechanism. This process is the opposite process
to the encoding stage. The structural illustration is shown
in Fig. 5. Specifically, the feature map from FGE will be
sent to the decoding stage correspondingly. This process is
realized by skipping the connection. The advantage of this is
that the feature information extracted in the encoding stage
can be provided to the decoding stage, reducing the loss of
feature information loss. Up-sampling is realized by bilinear
interpolation. During the up-sampling process, the resolution
of the image is continuously expanded and finally returns
to the same resolution as the original noise image. Skip
connection combined with up-sampling can make the noise
feature map restored in the decoding stage more accurate.
In the decoding stage, the further extraction and processing
of feature information are mainly implemented by Res-WA,
which is the wavelet attention residual block. The specific

where X is the original input feature map. (H 1, H 2, H 3)
are the high-frequency subbands obtained from the DW T .
L represents the low-frequency subband from the DW T of
X . Daubechies refers to the specific wavelet function used in
DW T and IDWT.

Authorized licensed use limited to: WUHAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on August 16,2025 at 23:58:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DING et al.: WACAFRN FOR IMAGE DENOISING

6161

In practical usage, the integration of wavelet attention
with a residual network enhances noise removal. The WARD
handling procedure can be summed up as follows:




 
OWARD = f R3 f I 3 f R2 f I 2 f R1 f I 1 (O F G E )
, (5)

where N represents the noisy input image, Concat stands for
the function of fusing two noise maps, C1 represents convolution applied to the merged feature map, and C represents the
clean image predicted by the model.

where O F G E is the output of FGE, f I 1 , f I 2 , and f I 3 are
convolution functions that respectively represent the number
of channels changed from 256 to 128, 128 to 64, and 64 to
64, f R1 , f R2 , and f R3 are Res-WA blocks and OW A R D is the
output of WARD.

IV. E XPERIMENTS AND A NALYSES

E. Noise Estimated Block
NEB is designed to extract a global noise map while
helping to enhance denoising performance. As shown in Fig. 1,
NEB consists of two parts, a 7-layer neural network composed of convolutions and dilated convolutions and a residual
connection. The input of NEB is the original noisy image.
Different from the backbone denoising network composed of
an encoder and decoder, NEB pays more attention to modeling
and estimating noise. The convolution part in NEB uses a
combination of Conv, BN, and PReLU to fully extract feature
information while avoiding difficult training situations. The
second convolution uses dilated convolution to further increase
the receptive field. In addition, residual connections reduce
long-distance dependencies. Fusing the output of the noise
estimation block with the output of the backbone denoising
network can take full advantage of the advantages of both.
The backbone denoising network focuses on recovering clean
images from noisy input images, while the noise estimation
block provides more accurate noise estimates. By fusing the
outputs of the two, the backbone denoising network can be
more targeted to remove noise, which can help the network to
better adapt to different types and intensities of noise, making
it more widely applicable. Moreover, by combining the outputs
of the noise estimation block and the main denoising network,
finer image restoration can be performed based on prior noise
information. The final output of NEB is the noise estimation
map. The specific process of NEB is as follows.
O N E B = f C2−C6 ( f C1D1 (N )) + f C1D1 (N ),

(6)

where f C1D1 represents the first convolutional layer and the
first dilated convolutional layer (second layer) of NEB, f C2−C6
is next five layers of convolution, f C2−C6 ( f C1D1 (N )) +
f C1D1 (N ) represents the residual connection and O N E B is
the output of the NEB.
F. Fused Reconstruction Block
In FRB, the fusion process begins by fully integrating the
outputs from the encoder-decoder (which are the channel noise
maps) and the NEB (which are the noise estimate maps)
using concatenation and then altering the channels through
convolution to create the ultimate merged noise map. Finally,
a residual learning strategy is employed to obtain a clean
image by subtracting the merged noise map from the input
of WACAFRN (the noisy image).
The following equation can be used to describe this process:
C = N − C1 (Concat (OWARD , ONEB )) ,

(7)

A. Experimental Setup
1) Training Datasets: The experiments in this study used
three main training datasets. Specifically, for denoising
grayscale images, we use 400 images from the BSD400 [38]
dataset, the first 100 images from the Waterloo Exploration
Database [39] dataset, and 800 images from the 4x enlarged
version of the DIV2K [40] dataset to compose a synthetic
dataset. To ensure that there are enough samples for model
training, we perform data augmentation. First, we apply a
bicubic interpolation method with reduction factors of 1.0, 0.9,
0.8, and 0.7 to expand the size of the training dataset, and then
crop the image patch, the size of the cropped image patch is
set to 40 × 40, we set the training batch size to 128, resulting
in a total of 17479 × 128 image patches being cropped for
training the model.
For color image denoising, we use 3000 color images
from the Waterloo Exploration Database as training images.
We perform the same data augmentation method as grayscale
image denoising and we cropped a total of 7356 × 128 image
patches to train the model.
The Waterloo Exploration Database dataset and 100 JPEGcompressed 512 × 512 data from the Nam [41] dataset are
used to create the real noisy image training dataset in addition
to the synthetic noisy training dataset. Here, all the images are
equally divided into 50×50-pixel blocks for processing.
2) Testing Datasets: The denoising effect of WACAFRN
was tested in our experiments using a total of seven test
sets: BSD68 [42], Set12 [43], CBSD68 [42], Kodak24 [44],
McMaster [45], CC [46] and Nam. They include BSD68 and
Set12 for testing grayscale images, CBSD68, Kodak24, and
McMaster for testing color images, and CC and Nam for
testing images with real noise.
3) Evaluation Metrics: Two metrics, Peak Signal-to-Noise
Ratio (PSNR) [47] and Structural Similarity (SSIM) [48], are
utilized to evaluate the image denoising model’s performance
in this study. Higher values for both metrics indicate better
image quality.
4) Implementation Details and Optimization: The NVIDIA
Tesla V100 (32G) GPU is used in this study’s experiments.
Running memory is 40GB. The batch size is set to 128 and the
training epoch to 100. The initial learning rate is 1e-3; after
30 epochs, it decays to 1e-4; and after 60 epochs, it decays
to 1e-5. The optimization method uses the Adam algorithm,
and like most advanced methods [19], [23], [28], we use
MSE as the loss function without introducing any additional
regularization terms.
B. Experimental Analysis on Grayscale Image Denoising
For grayscale image denoising, we evaluate our proposed
WACAFRN model on two common test datasets, namely Set12
and BSD68, to be clear, the test and training sets do not

Authorized licensed use limited to: WUHAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on August 16,2025 at 23:58:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6162

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 34, NO. 7, JULY 2024

TABLE I
C OMPARISON OF G RAYSCALE I MAGE D ENOISING R ESULTS , W ITH AVERAGE PSNR AND SSIM ON THE BSD68 AND SET12 DATASETS ,
W HERE H IGHER VALUES I NDICATE B ETTER Q UALITY

Fig. 6. Comparison of denoising performance of different methods on the same image from Set12, σ = 15: (a) original image, (b) noisy image, (c) DnCNN
(PSNR=33.24dB), (d) IRCNN (PSNR=33.21dB), (e) FFDNet (PSNR=33.01dB), (f) DudeNet (PSNR=33.38 dB), (g) WACAFRN (PSNR=33.52 dB).

intersect. We compare WACAFRN with 18 state-of-the-art
image denoising models, including traditional classical image
denoising methods such as WNNM [12], BM3D [13], and
EPLL [18], as well as discriminative and deep learning methods, namely MLP [15], CSF [16], TRND [17], DnCNN [19],
IRCNN [21], FFDNet [20], ECNDNet [49], RIDNet [22],
ADNet [23], AINDNet [50], DudeNet [24] DBDNet [25],
COLA-Net [51], WINNet [32], and MWDCNN [28]. To logically confirm the performance of our suggested technique,
we select representative noise cases, namely σ = 15, 25, and
50, from three levels: low noise, medium noise, and high noise
for comparative experiments. Table I shows the average PSNR
and SSIM comparison of various models on BSD68 and Set12
under σ = 15, 25, 50. According to Table I, our proposed
WACAFRN achieves the best PSNR and SSIM values at each
of the three noise levels. On two datasets, as shown in Table I,
WACAFRN gets the best structural similarity under three noise
levels, proving that it is more capable of repairing the intricate
structural details of images. We visualized denoising results
to compare various methods. Fig. 6 highlights the results of
WACAFRN and other models on the Set12 dataset at noise
level 15. Key details in the image are encircled and enlarged
twice for clarity. The WACAFRN’s result closely matches the

original image’s contour, indicating its superior visual effect
compared to other models.
C. Experimental Analysis on Color Image Denoising
We compared seven advanced methods for the task of color
image denoising. The comparison was conducted on three
public test datasets, considering five different noise levels.
According to the results presented in Table II, WACAFRN
exhibited the best denoising performance across all test examples. Particularly, WACAFRN outperformed the alternative
methods, showcasing its superior noise resistance capabilities,
especially in high noise level scenarios. In Fig. 7, we provided
a visual comparison of the denoising effects of each method
on an image from the Kodak24 dataset. To emphasize image
details, we framed and magnified the circled regions. Upon
visual inspection, it was evident that IRCNN resulted in
image blurring, while DudeNet introduced noticeable line
deformation. In contrast, WACAFRN consistently achieved
superior visual results.
D. Experimental Analysis on Real-World Denoising
While synthetic noise research can support and validate
denoising model performance, real-world noise is typically

Authorized licensed use limited to: WUHAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on August 16,2025 at 23:58:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DING et al.: WACAFRN FOR IMAGE DENOISING

6163

TABLE II
C OMPARISON OF D ENOISING R ESULTS FOR C OLOR I MAGES , W ITH AVERAGE PSNR ON THE CBSD68, KODAK24, AND MCMASTER DATASETS ,
W HERE H IGHER VALUES I NDICATE B ETTER D ENOISING P ERFORMANCE

Fig. 7. Comparison of denoising effects of different methods on the same image from Kodak24, σ = 50:(a) original image (b)noisy image (c)IRCNN
(PSNR=30.89dB), (d)ADNet (PSNR=30.96dB), (e)DudeNet (PSNR=31.12dB), (f)WACAFRN (PSNR=31.54dB).

complex, diverse, and unpredictable. It encompasses various
environmental factors, sensor characteristics, and image conditions. Experimenting with real-world noise allows us to
assess denoising methods in realistic scenarios, understand
their strengths and limitations, and evaluate their robustness
and generalizability across different noise types, intensities,
and image characteristics. We conducted experiments using
the WACAFRN method for real-world noise removal on
the CC and Nam datasets. On the CC dataset, we compared WACAFRN with five advanced methods. As shown
in Table III, WACAFRN consistently outperformed all other
methods, achieving the highest PSNR and SSIM values in
all 15 scenarios and the highest average PSNR and SSIM
result, surpassing other methods by at least 2.08 dB in PSNR.
Notably, WACAFRN achieved PSNR values of 40.00 dB
or higher in multiple cases, indicating high-quality denoised
images. On the Nam dataset, we compared WACAFRN
with BM3D, MLP, DnCNN, FFDNet, RIDNet, CBDNet,
SADNet [53], MPRNet [52], AINDNet, and MIRNet [54].
Based on the results presented in Table IV, our proposed
method achieved the best PSNR and SSIM results, specifically
measuring 40.53 dB and 0.989, respectively. Considering
the results on both datasets, it’s evident that our proposed
method can achieve outstanding performance with effective

computational complexity in real-world noise removal
tasks.
E. Ablation Study
In this section, we delve into the significance and reasoning
behind each module in WACAFRN through ablation experiments. These experiments targeted real-world noise removal
on the CC test set and Gaussian denoising tasks at noise levels
of 50 on the BSD68 dataset. For a comparative perspective,
we set WACAFRN as our baseline. The study removed each
module systematically to see its impact on PSNR and model
parameters. The outcomes are presented in Tables V and VI,
offering insights into each module’s role.
To demonstrate the impact of removing ACA (with 0.02M
parameters), we conducted experiments. As a result, on the CC
dataset, PSNR decreased from 37.82 to 37.19. This indicates
that ACA plays a positive role in capturing and more thoroughly removing noise, and our improved ACA outperforms
the original CA attention.
To validate the effectiveness of the wavelet attention mechanism (with 0.12M parameters), we removed it, and by
observing the experimental results, it is evident that wavelet
attention plays a crucial role in improving model performance.
To further validate the contribution of WA in preserving image

Authorized licensed use limited to: WUHAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on August 16,2025 at 23:58:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6164

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 34, NO. 7, JULY 2024

TABLE III
C OMPARISON OF THE AVERAGE PSNR/SSIM VALUES FOR D ENOISED R EAL I MAGES ON THE CC DATASET. H IGHER VALUES FOR B OTH PSNR AND
SSIM I NDICATE B ETTER D ENOISING P ERFORMANCE

TABLE IV
C OMPARISON OF THE AVERAGE PSNR/SSIM VALUES FOR D ENOISED
R EAL I MAGES ON THE NAM DATASET. H IGHER VALUES FOR B OTH
PSNR AND SSIM I NDICATE B ETTER D ENOISING P ERFORMANCE .
T HE D ENOISING I NFERENCE T IME I S THE AVERAGE T IME
O BTAINED W ITH AN I MAGE S IZE OF 512×512

TABLE VI
A BLATION S TUDY OF K EY C OMPONENTS ON THE BSD68
DATASET W ITH N OISE L EVEL 50

TABLE V
A BLATION S TUDY OF K EY C OMPONENTS ON THE CC DATASET

Fig. 8. Ablation comparison for the wavelet attention mechanism, comparing
denoising performance on the same image (from BSD68) at a noise level σ =
50: (a) original image, (b) noisy image, (c) denoised result by WACAFRN
without wavelet attention, (d) denoised result by WACAFRN.

edge information, we compared the denoising results with and
without WA, as shown in Fig. 8. We selected four detailed
regions in the same image with rich edge transformations and

magnified them by a factor of two. By visualizing the results,
WA effectively preserves image edge information during the
denoising process.

Authorized licensed use limited to: WUHAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on August 16,2025 at 23:58:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DING et al.: WACAFRN FOR IMAGE DENOISING

The ablation study on other parts of the model primarily
focused on the following aspects: Firstly, to validate the
role of stacked fine-grained networks (0.51M), we conducted
comparative experiments by removing stacked Res2Net blocks
and removing only one Res2Net block. Next, we verified
the role of PFEB (0.14M) by removing it from the model.
The results showed a significant impact on the model’s performance, demonstrating the contribution of PFEB. Finally,
we conducted comparative experiments by removing NEB
(0.18M) to validate the performance enhancement achieved
by incorporating noise estimation information.
V. C ONCLUSION
In this study, a fine-grained residual denoising network
guided by wavelet and adaptive coordinate attention is proposed. Unlike most deep neural networks, the design of
WACAFRN stems from better acquisition and utilization of
noise channel information and position information, improving
the reasoning ability of the model, and better understanding
and restoring image edge information. WACAFRN consists
of five main parts: PFEB, FGE, WARD, NEB, and FRB,
each working in coordination with the other. The influence
of key blocks on the image denoising effect is verified by
ablation experiments. Extensive experiments show that our
proposed WACAFRN can achieve competitive performance in
the tasks of grayscale image denoising, color image denoising,
and real-world image denoising. In the future, considering
the complexity and diversity of real-world noise, we are
committed to continuing to improve the model and further
improve the effect of real-world denoising.
R EFERENCES
[1] W. Xu, Q. Zhu, N. Qi, and D. Chen, “Deep sparse representation based
image restoration with denoising prior,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video
Technol., vol. 32, no. 10, pp. 6530–6542, Oct. 2022.
[2] Y. Pan, C. Ren, X. Wu, J. Huang, and X. He, “Real image denoising via
guided residual estimation and noise correction,” IEEE Trans. Circuits
Syst. Video Technol., vol. 33, no. 4, pp. 1994–2000, Apr. 2023.
[3] X. Zhang, W. Lin, and Q. Huang, “Fine-grained image quality assessment: A revisit and further thinking,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video
Technol., vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 2746–2759, May 2022.
[4] X. Chen, S. B. Kang, J. Yang, and J. Yu, “Fast edge-aware denoising by
approximated patch geodesic paths,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video
Technol., vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 897–909, Jun. 2015.
[5] C. Tian, L. Fei, W. Zheng, Y. Xu, W. Zuo, and C.-W. Lin, “Deep learning
on image denoising: An overview,” Neural Netw., vol. 131, pp. 251–275,
Nov. 2020.
[6] P. K. Mishro, S. Agrawal, R. Panda, and A. Abraham, “A survey on stateof-the-art denoising techniques for brain magnetic resonance images,”
IEEE Rev. Biomed. Eng., vol. 15, pp. 184–199, 2022.
[7] H. Yu, L. Zhao, and H. Wang, “Image denoising using trivariate shrinkage filter in the wavelet domain and joint bilateral filter in the spatial
domain,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 18, no. 10, pp. 2364–2369,
Oct. 2009.
[8] K. Zheng, T. Li, Z. Su, and B. Zhang, “Sparse elitist group lasso
denoising in frequency domain for bearing fault diagnosis,” IEEE Trans.
Ind. Informat., vol. 17, no. 7, pp. 4681–4691, Jul. 2021.
[9] C. Tian and Y. Chen, “Image segmentation and denoising algorithm
based on partial differential equations,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 20, no. 20,
pp. 11935–11942, Oct. 2020.
[10] H. Zhang, L. Liu, W. He, and L. Zhang, “Hyperspectral image denoising with total variation regularization and nonlocal low-rank tensor
decomposition,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 58, no. 5,
pp. 3071–3084, May 2020.
[11] A. Buades, B. Coll, and J.-M. Morel, “A non-local algorithm for image
denoising,” in Proc. IEEE Comput. Soc. Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit., San Diego, CA, USA, vol. 2, Jun. 2005, pp. 60–65.

6165

[12] S. Gu, L. Zhang, W. Zuo, and X. Feng, “Weighted nuclear norm
minimization with application to image denoising,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2014, pp. 2862–2869.
[13] K. Dabov, A. Foi, V. Katkovnik, and K. Egiazarian, “Image denoising
by sparse 3-D transform-domain collaborative filtering,” IEEE Trans.
Image Process., vol. 16, no. 8, pp. 2080–2095, Aug. 2007.
[14] V. Jain et al., “Supervised learning of image restoration with convolutional networks,” in Proc. IEEE 11th Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV),
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, Oct. 2007, pp. 1–8.
[15] H. C. Burger, C. J. Schuler, and S. Harmeling, “Image denoising:
Can plain neural networks compete with BM3D?” in Proc. IEEE
Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Providence, RI, USA, Jun. 2012,
pp. 2392–2399.
[16] U. Schmidt and S. Roth, “Shrinkage fields for effective image restoration,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2014,
pp. 2774–2781.
[17] Y. Chen and T. Pock, “Trainable nonlinear reaction diffusion: A flexible
framework for fast and effective image restoration,” IEEE Trans. Pattern
Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 39, no. 6, pp. 1256–1272, Jun. 2017.
[18] D. Zoran and Y. Weiss, “From learning models of natural image patches
to whole image restoration,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV),
Nov. 2011, pp. 479–486.
[19] K. Zhang, W. Zuo, Y. Chen, D. Meng, and L. Zhang, “Beyond a
Gaussian denoiser: Residual learning of deep CNN for image denoising,”
IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 26, no. 7, pp. 3142–3155, Jul. 2017.
[20] K. Zhang, W. Zuo, and L. Zhang, “FFDNet: Toward a fast and flexible
solution for CNN-based image denoising,” IEEE Trans. Image Process.,
vol. 27, no. 9, pp. 4608–4622, Sep. 2018.
[21] K. Zhang, W. Zuo, S. Gu, and L. Zhang, “Learning deep CNN denoiser
prior for image restoration,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), Jul. 2017, pp. 2808–2817.
[22] S. Anwar and N. Barnes, “Real image denoising with feature attention,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019,
pp. 3155–3164.
[23] C. Tian, Y. Xu, Z. Li, W. Zuo, L. Fei, and H. Liu, “Attentionguided CNN for image denoising,” Neural Netw., vol. 124, pp. 117–129,
Apr. 2020.
[24] C. Tian, Y. Xu, W. Zuo, B. Du, C.-W. Lin, and D. Zhang, “Designing
and training of a dual CNN for image denoising,” Knowl.-Based Syst.,
vol. 226, Aug. 2021, Art. no. 106949.
[25] J. Ma, C. Peng, X. Tian, and J. Jiang, “DBDnet: A deep boosting strategy for image denoising,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia, vol. 24,
pp. 3157–3168, 2022.
[26] B. Jiang, Y. Lu, J. Wang, G. Lu, and D. Zhang, “Deep image denoising
with adaptive priors,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 32,
no. 8, pp. 5124–5136, Aug. 2022.
[27] S. W. Zamir, A. Arora, S. Khan, M. Hayat, F. S. Khan, and M. Yang,
“Restormer: Efficient transformer for high-resolution image restoration,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
Jun. 2022, pp. 5718–5729.
[28] C. Tian, M. Zheng, W. Zuo, B. Zhang, Y. Zhang, and D. Zhang, “Multistage image denoising with the wavelet transform,” Pattern Recognit.,
vol. 134, Feb. 2023, Art. no. 109050.
[29] H. Zhang et al., “Attention-guided multitask convolutional neural network for power line parts detection,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas.,
vol. 71, pp. 1–13, 2022.
[30] W. Liu, Q. Yan, and Y. Zhao, “Densely self-guided wavelet network
for image denoising,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. Workshops (CVPRW), Jun. 2020, pp. 1742–1750.
[31] P. Liu, H. Zhang, K. Zhang, L. Lin, and W. Zuo, “Multi-level waveletCNN for image restoration,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit. Workshops (CVPRW), Jun. 2018, pp. 773–782.
[32] J.-J. Huang and P. L. Dragotti, “WINNet: Wavelet-inspired invertible
network for image denoising,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 31,
pp. 4377–4392, 2022.
[33] S.-H. Gao, M.-M. Cheng, K. Zhao, X.-Y. Zhang, M.-H. Yang, and
P. Torr, “Res2Net: A new multi-scale backbone architecture,” IEEE
Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 652–662,
Feb. 2021.
[34] F. Zhu, Y. Huang, C. Xue, L. Mihaylova, and J. Chambers, “A sliding
window variational outlier-robust Kalman filter based on student’s tnoise modeling,” IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron. Syst., vol. 58, no. 5,
pp. 4835–4849, Oct. 2022.
[35] S. Guo, Z. Yan, K. Zhang, W. Zuo, and L. Zhang, “Toward convolutional
blind denoising of real photographs,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 1712–1722.

Authorized licensed use limited to: WUHAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on August 16,2025 at 23:58:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6166

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 34, NO. 7, JULY 2024

[36] J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel, “Denoising diffusion probabilistic models,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NIPS), vol. 33, 2020,
pp. 6840–6851.
[37] A. Lugmayr, M. Danelljan, A. Romero, F. Yu, R. Timofte, and
L. Van Gool, “RePaint: Inpainting using denoising diffusion probabilistic models,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 11451–11461.
[38] D. Martin, C. Fowlkes, D. Tal, and J. Malik, “A database of human
segmented natural images and its application to evaluating segmentation
algorithms and measuring ecological statistics,” in Proc. 8th IEEE Int.
Conf. Comput. Vision. ICCV, vol. 2, Jul. 2001, pp. 416–423.
[39] K. Ma et al., “Waterloo exploration database: New challenges for image
quality assessment models,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 26, no. 2,
pp. 1004–1016, Feb. 2017.
[40] E. Agustsson and R. Timofte, “NTIRE 2017 challenge on single image
super-resolution: Dataset and study,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit. Workshops (CVPRW), Jul. 2017, pp. 1122–1131.
[41] J. Xu, H. Li, Z. Liang, D. Zhang, and L. Zhang, “Real-world noisy
image denoising: A new benchmark,” 2018, arXiv:1804.02603.
[42] S. Roth and M. J. Black, “Fields of experts: A framework for learning
image priors,” in Proc. IEEE Comput. Soc. Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), San Diego, CA, USA, 2005, pp. 860–867.
[43] J. Mairal, F. Bach, J. Ponce, G. Sapiro, and A. Zisserman, “Non-local
sparse models for image restoration,” in Proc. IEEE 12th Int. Conf.
Comput. Vis., Kyoto, Japan, Sep. 2009, pp. 2272–2279.
[44] R. Franzen, “Kodak lossless true color image suite,” vol. 4, no. 2, 1999.
[Online]. Available: http://r0k.us/graphics/kodak
[45] L. Zhang, X. Wu, A. Buades, and X. Li, “Color demosaicking by local
directional interpolation and nonlocal adaptive thresholding,” J. Electron.
Imaging., vol. 20, no. 2, 2011, Art. no. 023016.
[46] S. Nam, Y. Hwang, Y. Matsushita, and S. J. Kim, “A holistic approach
to cross-channel image noise modeling and its application to image
denoising,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
Jun. 2016, pp. 1683–1691.
[47] Q. Huynh-Thu and M. Ghanbari, “Scope of validity of PSNR in
image/video quality assessment,” Electron. Lett., vol. 44, no. 13,
pp. 800–801, 2008.
[48] A. Horé and D. Ziou, “Image quality metrics: PSNR vs. SSIM,” in Proc.
20th Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit., Aug. 2010, pp. 2366–2369.
[49] C. Tian, Y. Xu, L. Fei, J. Wang, J. Wen, and N. Luo, “Enhanced CNN for
image denoising,” CAAI Trans. Intell. Technol., vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 17–23,
Mar. 2019.
[50] Y. Kim, J. W. Soh, G. Y. Park, and N. I. Cho, “Transfer learning from
synthetic to real-noise denoising with adaptive instance normalization,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
Jun. 2020, pp. 3479–3489.
[51] C. Mou, J. Zhang, X. Fan, H. Liu, and R. Wang, “COLA-Net: Collaborative attention network for image restoration,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia,
vol. 24, pp. 1366–1377, 2022.
[52] S. W. Zamir et al., “Multi-stage progressive image restoration,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021,
pp. 14816–14826.
[53] M. Chang, Q. Li, H. Feng, and Z. Xu, “Spatial-adaptive network for
single image denoising,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV), 2020,
pp. 171–187.
[54] S. W. Zamir et al., “Learning enriched features for real image restoration
and enhancement,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV), 2020,
pp. 492–511.

Shifei Ding (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
degree from the Shandong University of Science
and Technology, Qingdao, China, in 2004. He is
currently a member of the IEEE Computer Society,
the Director, and an Outstanding Member of China
Computer Federation (CCF), and the Director and
a Senior Member of the Chinese Association for
Artificial Intelligence (CAAI). His research interests
include intelligent information processing, pattern
recognition, machine learning, data mining, and
granular computing.

Qidong Wang received the B.S. degree from the
University of Jinan, Jinan, China, in 2021. Currently,
he is pursuing the M.S. degree with the China
University of Mining and Technology. His current
research interests include deep learning, image processing, and analysis.

Lili Guo (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree
from Tianjin University in 2021. She is currently
a Lecturer with the China University of Mining
and Technology. Her research interests include deep
learning and speech emotion recognition.

Xuan Li received the Ph.D. degree from Tsinghua
University in 2023. She is currently an Associate
Professor with the China University of Mining and
Technology. Her research interests include machine
learning and data mining.

Ling Ding received the M.S. degree from the
Asia Pacific University of Technology and Innovation in 2019. She is currently pursuing the Ph.D.
degree with Tianjin University. Her research interests
include deep learning, graph machine learning, and
clustering.

Xindong Wu (Fellow, IEEE) received the
Ph.D. degree from The University of Edinburgh,
Edinburgh, U.K. He is currently a Senior Research
Scientist with the Research Center for Knowledge
Engineering, Zhejiang Laboratory, China. His
current research interests include data mining, big
data analytics, and knowledge engineering. He is
a fellow of the American Association for the
Advancement of Science. He was the Editor-inChief of IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON K NOWLEDGE
AND DATA E NGINEERING (2005–2008). He is the
Steering Committee Chair of the IEEE International Conference on Data
Mining and the Editor-in-Chief of Knowledge and Information Systems.

Authorized licensed use limited to: WUHAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on August 16,2025 at 23:58:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

