IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

4412115

GLVMamba: A Global–Local Visual State-Space
Model for Remote Sensing Image Segmentation
Huihui Li , Member, IEEE, Huajian Pan , Xiaoyong Liu, Jinchang Ren , Senior Member, IEEE,
Zhiguo Du, Senior Member, IEEE, and Jingjing Cao

Abstract— Semantic segmentation of remote sensing images
(RSIs) has significant advances with the adoption of deep neural
networks, taking the advantages of convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) in local feature extraction with transformers in global
information modeling. However, due to the limitations of CNNs
in long-range modeling capabilities and the computational complexity constraints of transformers, remote sensing (RS) semantic
segmentation still faces issues such as serious holes, rough edge
segmentation, and false and even missed detections caused by
the light, shadow, and other factors. To address these issues,
we propose a visual state-space (VSS) model called GLVMamba,
which uses CNNs as the encoder and the proposed global–local
VSS (GLVSS) block as the core decoder. Specifically, the GLVSS
block introduces locality forward feedback and shift window
mechanism to addresses the deficiency of insufficient modeling
of neighboring pixel dependencies of Mamba, which enhances
the integration of global and local context during feature reconstruction, boosts object perception capabilities of the model, and
effectively refines edge contours. In addition, the scale-aware
pyramid pooling (SCPP) module is proposed to fully merge the
features from various scales and adaptively fuse and extract the
distinguishing features to mitigate the holes and false detections.
The GLVMamba effectively captures global–local semantic information and multiscale feature through the GLVSS block and
the SCPP module, achieving efficient and accurate RS semantic
segmentation. Extensive experiments on two widely used datasets
have effectively demonstrated the superiority of our proposed
Received 17 December 2024; revised 21 February 2025 and 12 April 2025;
accepted 6 May 2025. Date of publication 23 May 2025; date of current
version 19 June 2025. This work was supported in part by Guangdong Science
and Technology Project under Grant KTP20210197 and Grant KTP20240126,
in part by Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation under
Grant 2023A1515010939, and in part by the Project of Education Department of Guangdong Province under Grant 2022KTSCX068. (Corresponding
authors: Xiaoyong Liu; Jinchang Ren.)
Huihui Li is with the School of Computer Science, Guangdong Polytechnic
Normal University, Guangzhou 510630, China, and also with Guangzhou
Key Laboratory for Digital Science and Technology, Guangzhou Digital Technology Group Company Ltd., Guangzhou 510656, China (e-mail:
lihh@gpnu.edu.cn).
Huajian Pan and Jingjing Cao are with the School of Computer Science, Guangdong Polytechnic Normal University, Guangzhou 510630, China
(e-mail: panhuajian@gpnu.edu.cn; caojj@gpnu.edu.cn).
Xiaoyong Liu is with the School of Computer Science, Guangdong Polytechnic Normal University, Guangzhou 510630, China, and also with the
School of Data Science and Artificial Intelligence, Jilin Engineering Normal
University, Changchun 130052, China (e-mail: liuxy@gpnu.edu.cn).
Jinchang Ren is with the School of Computer Science, Guangdong Polytechnic Normal University, Guangzhou 510630, China, and also with the National
Subsea Centre, Robert Gordon University, AB21 0BH Aberdeen, U.K. (e-mail:
jinchang.ren@ieee.org).
Zhiguo Du is with the School of Mathematics and Informatics,
South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou 510642, China (e-mail:
bluetooth@scau.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TGRS.2025.3572127

method over the other state-of-the-art methods. The code will be
available at https://github.com/Tokisakiwlp/GLVMamba
Index Terms— Mamba, remote sensing (RS), scale-aware pyramid pooling (SCPP), semantic segmentation.

I. I NTRODUCTION

A

DVANCEMENTS in drone and optical imaging technology have made remote sensing images (RSIs) easily
accessible. Semantic segmentation has become highly effective
approach for pixel-level classification, which is a hot topic
in RSI interpretation [1], [2]. Remote sensing (RS) semantic
segmentation is applied in many real-world scenarios, such as
urban planning [3], [4], land cover mapping [5], environmental
protection [6], [7], [8], and disaster assessment [9]. In recent
years, deep learning has made breakthrough progress in the
field of semantic segmentation. However, due to issues such as
serious holes, rough edge segmentation, false and even missed
detections caused by the light and other factors, as well as high
intraclass variability and high interclass similarity, which are
shown in Fig. 1, RS semantic segmentation remains extremely
challenging.
Semantic segmentation in RSIs based on convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) has produced fruitful research results
to address these challenges due to excellent feature extraction
capabilities of CNNs. Fully convolutional networks (FCNs)
[10], [11], [12] and SegNet [13], [14], [15] excelled in
hierarchical feature learning and achieved good segmentation
results. Encoder–decoder architectures such as U-Net [16],
[17] [18] introduced refined upsampling and skip connections,
allowing to reduce the loss of spatial information during the
feature reconstruction process. DeepLabv3+ [19], [20], [21]
and PSPNet [22], [23] used a multiscale pyramid strategy to
capture features at various scales. However, those approaches
of integrating semantic features through only convolution fail
to learn long-range dependencies and spatial correlations, making them insufficient to solve the problem of misclassification
caused by interclass similarity and intraclass differences.
With the advantages of transformers in global information
modeling, the researchers combined CNNs with transformers.
CTFuse [24] enhanced the feature representation of small-size
targets and large-size ground targets by integrating attention
mechanisms from both CNNs and transformers. ST-UNet [25]
used the spatial interaction module and the relational aggregation module to improve the representation of occluded

1558-0644 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: FUDAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on November 16,2025 at 13:26:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4412115

Fig. 1. Examples of the challenges in semantic segmentation of RSIs, which
are taken from the Vaihingen dataset. (a) Intraclass variability and interclass
similarity. (b) Affected by the shadow cast by the light, it is hard to recognize
the “Car” and “Building” and the edges are blurred.

objects. TCUNet [26] combined convolution and transformer
with dual encoders and used a multisource feature integration
module across scales in decoding to enhance boundary and
small-object segmentation. However, the lack of utilization
of global–local contextual information makes the problem of
objects and their boundaries blurring due to shadow occlusion
not well-resolved. In addition, hybrid CNNs and transformers
architectures have limitations due to CNNs have a limited
receptive field, and the self-attention mechanism of transformers is computationally expensive.
Lately, the proposal of Mamba [27] provides us with new
ideas. State-space models (SSMs) enable efficient long-range
modeling with linear complexity, though their 1-D scanning mechanism remains suboptimal for 2-D visual data.
Vision Mamba [28] leveraged bidirectional Mamba blocks
for efficient visual data processing, providing faster and
more memory-friendly representation learning compared with
self-attention mechanisms. VMamba [29] introduced visual
state-space (VSS) blocks and 2-D selective scanning (SS2D)
modules, where SS2D’s four scanning routes bridge 1-D
ordered scanning with 2-D visual data, enhancing contextual information collection from diverse perspectives. In RSI
classification, RSMamba [30] converted 2-D images into
1-D sequences and used a multipath SSMs encoder to capture long-range dependencies with excellent performance.
RS3 Mamba [31] combined CNNs and VMamba to enhance
dual-encoder features through collaborative a completion module. However, current approaches based on Mamba in RSIs are
simply to replace some of the network blocks with VSS blocks
containing the SS2D modules, ignoring the shortcomings of
SS2D applied to RSIs, i.e., the SS2D scanning mechanism
struggles to maintain the proximity between the original neighboring tokens, making it difficult to adequately extract local
details and sufficiently integrate local and global contextual
information.
To address the challenges in semantic segmentation of RSIs,
CNN-based methods have limitations in long-range modeling

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

capabilities, methods based on transformers are constrained by
computational complexity, and Mamba-based methods fail to
effectively integrate local and global contextual information.
Therefore, we propose a semantic segmentation model called
GLVMamba. GLVMamba consists of a CNN encoder to
realize the extraction of high-resolution feature information
and a decoder consisting of the improved global–local VSS
(GLVSS) block. The proposed GLVSS effectively uses the
SSM to capture global contextual information of linear complexity and preserves important local context. The features are
further optimized by exploring the correlation between global
and local contexts to improve the object blurring problem.
Moreover, the scale-aware pyramid pooling (SCPP) module is
proposed to capture multiscale features and adaptively select
and fuse the distinguishing features to effectively mitigate the
holes and false detections. The primary contributions of this
article are as follows.
1) We propose a VSS model called GLVMamba, which
uses the CNNs as the encoder and the proposed GLVSS
block as the core decoder. GLVMamba effectively
exploits powerful global context modeling capability of
Mamba while enhancing the integration of local and
global contexts during feature reconstruction, thereby
improving segmentation performance.
2) The proposed GLVSS block introduces the locality
forward feedback and a shift window mechanism, complementing the local context through local branch to
address the problem of insufficient local detail extraction
in the SS2D. The GLVSS block boosts the object localization capabilities of the model and effectively refines
the edge contours.
3) To better extract and fuse the multiscale features,
we propose the SCPP module to adaptively fuse and
extract the distinguishing features to solve the problem
of holes and false detections due to light and other
factors.
4) Extensive experimental results on the Potsdam and
Vaihingen datasets demonstrate that the proposed
GLVMamba outperforms the state-of-the-art methods,
thereby verifying its effectiveness and superiority.
II. R ELATED W ORKS
A. RS Semantic Segmentation Based on CNNs and
Transformer
As CNNs gain prominence, researchers are actively delving
into the potential of it in the realm of RS. FCN [10] achieved
to produce more accurate classifications in shorter computation time only through convolutional and deconvolutional
operations, providing a way to learn contextual features of
large-scale image labeling for RSI classification. Chen et al.
[32] implemented semantic segmentation to assess land use in
high-resolution RS data. Their proposed SNFCN effectively
eliminates the “salt-and-pepper” phenomenon and the block
effect by postprocessing with a stacking strategy. F2 HNN [33]
was a hypergraph neural network for hyperspectral image
(HSI) classification that fused spatial, spectral, and multimodal features to enhance accuracy over traditional GCN

Authorized licensed use limited to: FUDAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on November 16,2025 at 13:26:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LI et al.: GLVMamba: A GLOBAL–LOCAL VISUAL STATE-SPACE MODEL FOR RS IMAGE SEGMENTATION

methods. Dang et al. [34] introduced a novel semi-supervised
semantic segmentation framework that used cross-window
consistency and a dynamic pseudolabel memory bank to
more effectively leverage unlabeled data, achieving improved
segmentation performance across diverse datasets. SPGANDA [35] achieved unbiased image translation from the source
domain to the target domain using a semantic-preserved
generative adversarial network, while reducing the feature
gap between the two domains through a class distribution
alignment module, demonstrating superior performance on
multiple RS cross-domain segmentation benchmarks. Lu et al.
[36] presented a weakly supervised semantic segmentation
method for RSIs that combined self-supervised learning with
pseudolabel noise reduction to improve feature representation
and segmentation accuracy while reducing dependence on
costly pixel-level annotations.
After U-Net [16] was proposed, it could effectively alleviate
the above problems, and its encoder–decoder structure has
become widely adopted. DeepUNet [37] improved the effect
of sea–land segmentation using DownBlocks in contracted
paths and UpBlocks in expanded paths. On the other hand,
for the road segmentation problem, C-UNet [38] proposed a
multiscale dense dilated convolutional UNet module for better
extraction of road features, while CFAMNet [39] used the class
feature attention mechanism to improve interclass correlation
and further improve segmentation accuracy.
With the introduction of Vision Transformer [40], the
sequence modeling capabilities of transformers were successfully adapted to image processing. Zhou et al. [41]
introduced a single encoder with dual decoders based on the
Swin Transformer, leveraging a global stream and a shape
stream to enhance global context understanding and boundary
information capture for more precise semantic segmentation
of small targets in RSIs. Zhang et al. [42] introduced a
hybrid transformer–CNN model with a Swin Transformer
encoder and CNN-based decoder, enhanced by multiscale and
edge-aware features, achieving high semantic segmentation
accuracy. Chen et al. [43] combined global context modeling
with detailed spatial feature extraction and multitask learning
to improve the precise semantic segmentation performance of
ultrahigh-resolution RSIs. Furthermore, recent technological
advances have spurred exploration of large models such as
SAM [44], which is trained based on the Vision Transformer
architecture, and by pretraining on massive amounts of data,
these models are able to learn rich features and contextual
information to achieve higher segmentation accuracy on a wide
range of scenarios and objects.
In our approach, we use an encoder–decoder structure,
using convolutional operations and multiscale pyramids in the
encoder to efficiently extract image features. On the stage of
the decoder, we leverage improved Mamba to reconstruct the
global–local context of the image, resulting in the attainment
of precise segmentation outcomes.
B. Mamba-Based Semantic Segmentation
The utilization of CNNs and transformer-based models is
prevalent in tasks such as semantic segmentation. However,

4412115

CNNs are constrained by limited receptive fields, while transformers still exhibit suboptimal squared-level computational
complexity. Mamba [27], as a representative of SSMs, has
excelled in the domain of NLP with its linear complexity
sequences modeling and has increasingly attracted research
attention. VMamba [29] and Vision Mamba [28] implemented
SSM in image processing by introducing a bidirectional scanning SSM module and a cross-scan module. In addition to the
above areas, Mamba is also gradually applied to RS. Dong
et al. [45] proposed a novel framework called dual hyperspectral Mamba (DHM), which integrated global long-range
dependencies with local context information to enhance the
efficiency and precision of HSI reconstruction. RSMamba [30]
introduced a location-sensitive dynamic multipath activation
mechanism to address the limitation that Mamba was limited
to modeling causal sequences and was insensitive to spatial location, effectively accomplishing the RSI classification
task. In RS change detection, CDMamba [46] combined
Mamba with the convolutional network to extract local details
and dynamically fused dual time-phase features through the
designed AGLGF module, which guided the interaction of
global and local features and extracted more discriminative
change features, thus realizing more accurate change detection.
Zhou et al. [47] introduced the Mamba-in-Mamba architecture
for HSI classification, which combines a novel Mamba-crossscan mechanism to improve feature aggregation and training
efficiency. Liu et al. [48] leveraged ImageNet pretraining to
enhance performance, outperforming CNNs, ViTs, and other
Mamba-based models by a significant margin on multiple
medical datasets. Sanjid et al. [49] introduced Mamba HUNet,
a novel medical image segmentation architecture that combined CNNs and SSMs which achieved robust performance in
tasks such as multiple sclerosis lesion segmentation on MRI
scans.
In the realm of semantic segmentation, Sigma [50] was
designed for multimodal semantic segmentation, leveraging
Mamba to achieve global receptive fields with linear complexity. It effectively fused information from multiple modalities,
outperforming traditional methods in RGB-Thermal and RGBDepth segmentation tasks. VM-UNet [51] was a medical
image segmentation model that used a U-shaped architecture built on VSS blocks, achieving effective long-range
interaction modeling with linear complexity. Samba [52]
replaced Mamba with multihead self-attention in ViT to capture image data information and combined it with multiple
multilayer perceptrons (MLPs) to create a Samba block, which
used the Samba block as an encoder and UperNet as a
decoder to efficiently extract multilevel semantic information.
RS3 Mamba [31] leveraged a dual-branch network to effectively tackle the challenge of limited local receptive fields
in CNN, resulting in a notable enhancement in semantic
segmentation accuracy for RSIs. SSMs (especially Mamba)
provided an effective solution to the problem of excessive
complexity over long-distance dependencies in various contemporary applications. RTMamba [53] effectively enhances
the object perception and boundary detection in RSIs by
combining the Mamba and ITP modules, which improves the
segmentation accuracy of real-time RS semantic segmentation.

Authorized licensed use limited to: FUDAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on November 16,2025 at 13:26:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4412115

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

Fig. 2. Overall architecture of GLVMamba, which includes an encoder that features an SCPP module, using the ResNet as the backbone for effective feature
extraction at multiscales. The decoder is constructed by a GLVSS block, which thoroughly captures both the global and local contextual information. The
codec enhances the spatial information that may be missing from skip connections.

However, the above methods of using Mamba only simply
replace network blocks with Mamba blocks, ignoring the
significance of global and local context interaction. To solve
this problem, we use the GLVSS block as a decoder, which
effectively uses the global context capturing capability of
Mamba while complementing the local details through local
branches.
C. Multiscale Feature in RS
RSIs usually contain complex backgrounds, which may
cause the distinction between targets and backgrounds to
become difficult. Traditional downsampling approaches frequently fail to address this challenge effectively, prompting
multiscale feature fusion to emerge as a key research focus.
FPN [54] was first applied to target detection to deal with
multiscale changes by fusing features at different levels. Wang
et al. [55] introduced FPN into RSI segmentation by combining residual structure and UNet, which enhanced the accuracy
of identifying building changes. A-FPN [56] built significant
feature layers step by step using top pyramid, suppressed
background interference, improved the anti-interference ability against complex backgrounds (e.g., clouds, waves, and
man-made buildings), and performed well in ship detection.
DeepLabv3+ [19] fused features from various scales through
the ASPP module. While it improved the semantic segmentation performance, its parallel structure struggled with
imprecise edge segmentation and irregularities in large-scale
target segmentation within RSIs. Liu et al. [57] proposed to
combine the dual attention mechanism module with ASPP,
which used correlations between different channel features
to strengthen the relevant class features and improve the
classification, effectively eliminating the large-scale hole phenomenon of target segmentation and the problem of inaccurate
edge segmentation. MFVNet [58] is a novel network designed

for semantic segmentation of RSIs, addressing challenges of
large field of view (FOV) processing using multiple FOVs
through pyramid sampling. Ma et al. [59] presented MSPM,
a comprehensive framework for HSI classification using superpixel segmentation and multiscale feature extraction.
Although the above multiscale approach solves the issue
of complex background of RSIs to a certain extent, it still
has shortcomings. When integrating features at different levels, it is expected that the model can choose appropriate
feature details by itself. By adaptively selecting and fusing
these multiscale features, the model can balance global and
detail information, thereby improving segmentation accuracy.
Therefore, we propose an improved multiscale fusion strategy,
which makes the model better understand the complex scene
in RSI that provides more accurate segmentation results.
III. M ETHODS
In this section, we will outline the comprehensive structure
of the innovative GLVMamba, emphasizing the pivotal roles
of two essential modules: GLVSS block and SCPP module.
A. Overall Architecture
The overall model structure of GLVMamba is presented
in Fig. 2. Our GLVMamba follows the encoder and decoder
paradigm, which contains a backbone network encoder,
a GLVSS-based block decoder, and a semantic segmentation
header. Specifically, in the encoder stage, we leverage a
lightweight CNN (ResNet18) as the backbone network for
feature extraction. For input feature X ∈ R H ×W ×3 , through
backbone, we can effectively capture spatial information in
the input data to obtain preliminary features. Furthermore,
we integrate the SCPP module into the encoder to serve as a
multiscale feature extractor to obtain more comprehensive and

Authorized licensed use limited to: FUDAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on November 16,2025 at 13:26:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LI et al.: GLVMamba: A GLOBAL–LOCAL VISUAL STATE-SPACE MODEL FOR RS IMAGE SEGMENTATION

4412115

Fig. 3. SS2D process has three main steps—scan expanding, selective state-space models (S6), and scan merging: 1) scan expanding operation flattens a
2-D feature map into a 1-D vector along four directions, allowing each pixel to combine information from various angles and provide diverse viewpoints for
further processing; 2) S6 processes the four 1-D vectors using the selective scanning mechanism to dynamically adjust the parameters, retaining important
information while filtering out irrelevant information; and 3) scan merging operation achieves global receptive field by reintegrating 1-D sequence features
extracted from different directions into a 2-D feature map of the same size as the input through an inverse operation.

Fig. 4. Structure of the GLVSS block. (a) Overall structure of the original VSS block. (b) Overall structure of the GLVSS block. (c) Specific structure of
GLSS2D. The GLSS2D includes the SS2D branch to obtain the global context and the convolutional layer to supplement the local information, and finally
the feature refinement by integrating the two information through the forward propagation module.

effective feature extraction. In the decoder stage, we incorporate the GLVSS block to enhance the interactivity of global
and local context information during feature reconstruction.
By supplementing contextual information, the model can focus
more on the connections between features. In addition, skip
connections are used to feed the lower three layers of features
in the encoder into the last three stages of the decoder is
used to compensate for the lost spatial information. Finally,
the features reconstructed by the decoder will go through a
semantic segmentation head composed of bilinear interpolation
and Relu activation function operations to restore the original
image resolution and obtain the final prediction result image.
B. GLVSS Block
For RSIs with complex backgrounds—such as scenes
containing red/brown building roofs adjacent to asphalt
roads—the low visual contrast between objects poses significant challenges for accurate segmentation. In this case,

local information may not provide sufficient clues for the
model to distinguish between building edges and road edges.
After introducing global contextual information, the model
can better understand the overall scene, such as the coherent
direction of roads and the overall contour shape of buildings,
which helps reduce classification errors. Recent researchers
have used transformers to assign global context to models,
but the complex computational cost is also a problem that
researchers must address. The current challenge is to reduce
computational costs while maintaining accuracy.
In this regard, VMamba [29] proposed an SS2D architecture
that forms sequences of images from different scanning directions and then reorganizes each sequence into a single image
after constructing global dependencies through an SSM. The
SS2D core structure is illustrated in Fig. 3. The architecture
of the VSS block is shown in Fig. 4(a).
To expand the receptive field while maintaining computational efficiency, the scan expanding operation extends the
image in four directions, creating four distinct sequences.

Authorized licensed use limited to: FUDAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on November 16,2025 at 13:26:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4412115

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

Subsequently, these sequences are processed by selective SSM
(S6) [27], where each element interacts with earlier scanned
samples via a compressed hidden state to capture unique
features. Finally, the scan merging operation recombines these
sequences to the original image size. The main operation of S6
is to describe the evolution of the internal state of the system
and its relationship with the input and output through a set
of first-order differential equations (or difference equations).
Specifically, sequences x(t) ∈ R L can be transformed into
sequences y(t) ∈ R L through implicit state vectors h(t) ∈ R N ,
which can be represented as
ˆ t−1 + Bx
ˆ t
h t = Ah

(1)

yt = Ch t + Dxt .

(2)

Among them, Aˆ ∈ R N ×N , Bˆ ∈ R N , C ∈ R N , and D ∈ R N
represent the system matrices, which determine the dynamic
behavior and output response of the system (where N represents the specific number of groups divided, L represents the
number of images in each group, as shown in Fig. 3, where
N is 4 and L is 9). More details can be found in [27].
However, there are some challenges associated with applying SS2D to RSIs. When establishing global relationships
between pixels in various directions, the original spatial
adjacency between neighboring pixels is disrupted, significantly increasing the distance required to capture dependencies
among originally adjacent pixels (e.g., nearby car pixels may
become separated [60]). This detailed connectivity is essential
for analyzing RSIs. For address this issue, we design the
GLVSS block to ensure that model captures the global context
information while preserving the local spatial information,
further realizing the feature map refinement by integrating the
global–local context information. As illustrated in Fig. 4(b),
the input feature X ∈ R H ×W ×C (where C denotes the number
of channels of each decoder input feature, 512, 256, 128, and
64, respectively) mainly goes through two parallel branches.
Within the first branch, the input feature goes through the
layer normalization (LN) and linear projection operation to
extend their channels to 2C, followed by the depthwise
separable convolution and Silu into the core GLSS2D module.
Through this, the input feature will be enhanced with sufficient
global–local information, and then finally go through the LN
again. In the second, the input feature is processed only by
linear projection operation and then activated by Silu. Next, the
features from both the branches are aggregated by Hadamard
product (elementwise product). Finally, the channel is reduced
to C by a linear projection operation to produce a result
matching the input features’ dimensions. This process can be
represented as
X 1 = LN(GLSS2D(SiLU(DWConv(Linear(X )))

(3)

X 2 = SiLU(Linear(X ))
K
X ∗ = Linear(X 1
X 2)

(4)
(5)

where DWConv denotes the depthwise separable convolution,
J
GLSS2D denotes the global–local SS2D, and
denotes
elementwise product.
In particular, GLSS2D also consists of two parallel branches
[shown in Fig. 4(c)]. The global branch consists of the original

SS2D, and the selective scanning mechanism of SS2D can
effectively address the issue of the complexity of background
in RSIs through the ability of long-distance dependency modeling with linear complexity and thus capturing the global
context. To minimize the loss of dependency relationships
between adjacent pixels, a local convolution branch is added,
which contains two parallel convolutional layers with varying kernel sizes. Smaller convolution kernels are effective
at capturing detailed features, while larger convolution kernels cover a broader area of information. This dual-kernel
design optimally preserves adjacent pixel dependencies while
strengthening the feature hierarchy.
The module’s global local context capture capability is
greatly improved by the local branch and the global modeling
branch of SS2D. Specifically, for input feature X ′ ∈ R H ×W ×2C
of GLSS2D, which is divided into two distinct parts on the
channel: X 1′ ∈ R H ×W ×C and X 2′ ∈ R H ×W ×C . After that,
the feature X 1′ undergoes local branching to capture local
information to get a local feature X local and another feature
X 2′ extracts global context information on the image after the
global branch to get global feature X global .
Meanwhile, to increase the spatial correlation of local
features, we incorporate the concept of window attention [61]
and perform window shift operations [62] on local features
along different axis directions. The window shift operation
involves both the vertical and horizontal shifts. Let us take
the vertical shift operation as an example. To retain essential
spatial information in the input features’ height dimensions,
we use a zero-padding operation to prevent information loss.
Next, the padding features are divided along the channel using
the window size, and each group of features is shifted in height
(the shift size is set to half of the window size). The shifted
features are then concatenated, and the padding is removed by
the narrow operation. The horizontal shift operation follows
a similar process as the vertical shift operation. The convolutional layers include standard convolutional blocks, batch
norm (BN), and Relu. By this method, the loss of spatial
information in the process of local feature extraction can be
effectively reduced. For global features, we want to model the
local dependencies between nearby pixels, so we use a locality
feedforward module. This module consists of two standard
1 × 1 convolutions and a 3 × 3 convolution to introduce
locality into SS2D effectively. Finally, the two features are
combined using concatenation, and the LN further enriches the
semantic information to obtain fine-grained global and local
context features. This GLSS2D processing can be represented
as
X 1′ , X 2′ ∈ R H ×W ×C = Chunk(X ′ , 2)

(6)

X local = Conv1×1 (X 1′ ) ⊕ Conv3×3 (X 1′ ))
(7)
′
(8)
X global = SS2D(X 2 )
H ×W ×2C
X Fuse ∈ R
= LN(Cat(Shift(X local ), Locality(X global ))).
(9)
In this context, “Chunk,” “Cat,” “Shift,” and “Locality”
refer to group operations, concatenation operations, window shift operations, and locality feedforward modules,
respectively. This module gives local features the ability

Authorized licensed use limited to: FUDAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on November 16,2025 at 13:26:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LI et al.: GLVMamba: A GLOBAL–LOCAL VISUAL STATE-SPACE MODEL FOR RS IMAGE SEGMENTATION

Fig. 5.

4412115

Architecture of the SCPP module.

to model long-range dependencies by incorporating spatial
information. To enhance global features, additional local information is also included. The combination of both the aspects
further refines the feature map, leading to improved accuracy
in the localization of remotely sensed objects. Furthermore, the
shift operation is advantageous as it does not involve multiplication and addition, resulting in low computational complexity.
Algorithm 1 presents the pseudocode for GLSS2D.
C. SCPP Module
The problem of high interclass similarity and intraclass variability in RSIs makes it difficult to distinguish object features,
which can lead to misclassification and “hole” phenomena.
Therefore, it is crucial to fully use features from various
scales and perspectives for the semantic segmentation of RSIs.
To tackle these challenges, dilated convolution aims to enhance
feature representation by maximizing the receptive field and
improving global context through dilated convolution with
various dilated rates. However, the drawback of cross-pixel
sampling in dilated convolution results in reduced spatial
information, leading to ineffective perception and utilization
of specific locations determined by the dilated rate.
To address this issue, inspired by Chen et al. [19], we propose a feature pyramid pooling layer with a scale-aware
module, and its structure is depicted in Fig. 5. Using the scaleaware module, it can adaptively focus on important features
and fully use the information of multiscale perspectives,
effectively reduce the intraclass variability, mitigate the images
with different noises in RSIs, and alleviate the problems
of misclassification and hole phenomenon due to the large
intraclass variability or the high similarity between classes.
Specifically, the SCPP module is divided into three distinct parts. As represented in Fig. 5, for the input feature
X , a standard 1 × 1 convolution operation captures local
information, while a scale-aware module extracts features at
various scales, complemented by global pooling for obtaining
global context. For the three inputs of the scale-aware module,
the first step is to enter the three branches of parallel perceptual
dilated convolution operation, where each branch contains a
3 × 3 dilated convolution and a squeeze-and-excitation (SE)
module. Dilated convolutions with different dilated rates of

Algorithm 1 Workflow of GLSS2D
Input: Input feature map X ′ ∈ R H ×W ×2C
Output: Fused feature map X Fuse ∈ R H ×W ×2C
Step 1: Advanced Feature Decomposition with Local
Feature Extraction and Global Dependency Modeling
1: Chunk the input feature into X 1′ and X 2′ by channel,
X 1′ , X 2′ ∈ R H ×W ×C
2: Process X 1′ with parallel convolutions and Process X 2′ with
SS2D module
3:
X local = Conv1×1 (X 1′ ) ⊕ Conv3×3 (X 1′ ))
X local ∈ R H ×W ×C captures multilevel local pattern
4:
X global = SS2D(X 2′ )
X global ∈ R H ×W ×C establishes long-range dependency
Step 2: Feature FeedForward Enhancement
5: Apply shift-window mechanism to X local :
X̃ local = Shi f t (X local )
The specific steps are:
(1) Vertically shift local features to generate X local ;
(2) Process X local with Conv→BN→ReLU sequence;
(3) Shift features horizontally;
(4) Reapply Conv→BN→ReLU sequence;
(5) Get the final output X˜ local (X˜ local ∈ R H ×W ×C ).
6: Refine X global with locality feedback:
X̃ global = Localit y(X global )
The specific steps are:
(1) Process X global through a 1×1→3×3→1×1 convolutional block to extract refined features X global ;
(2) Fuse X global and X global via element-wise addition to
obtain X˜ global ;
(3) Output the enhanced global feature X˜ global (X˜ global ∈
R H ×W ×C ).
Step 3: Feature Refusion
˜ local , X˜ global )
7: Combine enhanced features: Concat(X
8:
X Fuse = LayerNorm(Concat(X˜ local , X˜ global ))

sizes 1, 3, and 5 are used to enlarge the receptive field to
obtain information at different scales, followed by an SE
module to eliminate redundant information, thereby enhancing
the network’s feature extraction capability, and then a 1 × 1
standard convolutional block is used to capture additional local

Authorized licensed use limited to: FUDAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on November 16,2025 at 13:26:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4412115

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

spatial information. For the fusion operation of different scale
features, the scale-aware module dynamically selects and fuses
appropriate scale features and key feature information through
self-learning. Specifically, for three different scale feature
maps FA , FB , and FC are summed and processed through
convolutional and softmax layers to create pixel attention maps
α ∈ R H ×W , β ∈ R H ×W , and γ ∈ R H ×W . Finally, the feature
maps obtained from self-learning are weighted and summed to
obtain
J the fused feature maps by elementwise multiplication
( ) Ffusion
K
K
K
Ffusion = α
FA + β
FB + γ
FC .
(10)
Finally, the obtained multiscale feature fusion map is concatenated with the standard convolutional branch and the
global pooling branch to supplement the context information to
obtain the final features. Through the processing of the scaleaware module, SCPP demonstrates excellent noise immunity
and effectively mitigates the hole problem.
IV. E XPERIMENTS
A. Datasets
The effectiveness of our proposed GLVMamba is demonstrated on two datasets: the Vaihingen dataset and the Potsdam
dataset (https://www.isprs.org/education/benchmarks.aspx).
1) Potsdam Dataset: The Potsdam dataset contains 38 RSIs,
each with a resolution of 6000 × 6000 pixels, covering
an area of 3.42 km2 and containing complex and dense
building structures, among others. The dataset comprises five
primary foreground categories and one background category.
We use three-channel (red, green, and blue) images from
multiband true orthophoto (TOP) plots for the experiments.
Following [43], [53], [63], and [64], we select 14 images
for testing, and the remaining 23 images (excluding images
with incorrect annotations 7_10) for training. These images are
cropped into small blocks of 1024 × 1024 pixels.
2) Vaihingen Dataset: The Vaihingen dataset is used for
semantic annotation tasks in urban environments and includes
33 ultrahigh-resolution TOP plots, averaging 2494 × 2064 pixels. This dataset, like the Potsdam dataset, is used for semantic
segmentation and includes six categories. Similarly, we use
three-channel (red, green, and blue) images. Similarly, we use
17 images for testing and 16 patches for training. Again,
we crop the original images into small chunks of 1024 ×
1024 pixels.
B. Implementation Details
1) Training Settings: The experiments are implemented on
NVIDIA GTX 3090 GPU using the PyTorch framework. For
fast convergence, we use the AdamW optimizer with a base
learning rate of 6e−4 and dynamically adjust the learning
rate through a cosine annealing strategy. For the Potsdam
and Vaihingen datasets, the images are randomly cropped
into 512 × 512 patches. The data are processed in the
same way as [65], and data augmentation techniques such
as random scale ([0.5,0.75,1.0,1.25,1.5]), random flip, and
random rotation were used in the training process.

2) Loss Function: Due to the category imbalance in the
Potsdam and Vaihingen datasets, we use the joint loss of crossentropy (CE) loss and dice loss. The overall loss is as follows:
L = L CE + L Dice
N X
C
X

1
yi log(ŷi )
N i=1 c=1
P
2 iN=1 yi ŷi
L Dice = 1 − P N
PN
i =1 yi +
i =1 ŷi
L CE = −

(11)
(12)
(13)

where N represents the number of samples, C indicates the
number of categories, yi is the true label of pixel i, ŷi is the
predicted probability that pixel i belongs to the target class,
L CE denotes the CE loss, while L Dice represents the dice loss.
3) Evaluation Metrics: We assess the model performance
using metrics such as overall accuracy (OA), mean F1 (mF1)
score, and mean intersection over union (mIoU). They are
defined as follows:
TP + TN
(14)
OA =
TP + TN + FP + FN
TP
(15)
Recall =
TP + FN
TP
(16)
Precision =
TP + FP
2 × Precision × Recall
F1 =
(17)
Pre + Recall
TP
IoU =
(18)
TP + FN + FP
where TP, TN, FP, and FN denote the true positive, true
negative, false positive, and false negative, respectively, mF1
denotes F1 score averaged over all the categories, and mIoU
denotes the IoU averaged over all the categories.
C. Ablation Study
To assess our proposed method and the two innovative
modules, we use the original VSS block without the SCPP
module as baseline and perform ablation experiments on
the Potsdam dataset. With different hyperparameter choices,
we choose the best hyperparameter as a benchmark. The
attention drop rate is set to 0, the patch size is set to 4, the
d_state value is set to 16, and the random depth rate is set to
0.1. The number of channels in the decoder stages is set to
512, 256, 128, and 64 to match the encoder’s channels. The
ablation experimental results are presented in Table I.
1) Effectiveness of GLVSS Block: As shown in Table I,
baseline represents the results presented with the original VSS
block, and there is a large improvement with the GLVSS
block compared with the results with the GLVSS block in the
second row of the table; when the GLVSS block is added to
the network model, mF1, OA, and mIoU improve by 0.33%,
0.25%, and 0.59%, respectively. It can be seen that the “Car”
category has the highest improvement with a 0.58% increase
in F1, and the other four categories “Impervious Surface,”
“Building,” “Low Vegetation,” and “Tree” are improved by
0.39%, 0.41%, 0.43%, and 0.26%, respectively.
Furthermore, in the first row of Fig. 6, we can see that
the shadows generated by the light pose challenges for the

Authorized licensed use limited to: FUDAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on November 16,2025 at 13:26:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LI et al.: GLVMamba: A GLOBAL–LOCAL VISUAL STATE-SPACE MODEL FOR RS IMAGE SEGMENTATION

4412115

TABLE I
A BLATION E XPERIMENT OF THE P ROPOSED M ODULES ON THE P OTSDAM DATASET, THE O RIGINAL VSS B LOCK W ITHOUT THE SCPP M ODULE AS
BASELINE (B OLD : B EST R ESULTS )

Fig. 6.

Ablation experiment visualization of the proposed modules.

model in distinguishing the road from the building, and before
adding the GLVSS block, the model recognizes the road as the
building and has boundary-blurring problem. With the addition
of the GLVSS block, the model effectively improves the ability
to recognize objects, correctly identifies the original road
part, and effectively improves the target contour and greatly
enhances segmentation accuracy for the building boundary.
In the middle part, we can also see that before adding the
GLVSS block, the right part of the clutter is incorrectly
recognized as a car. By incorporating GLVSS, the model
almost perfectly segments the car from the clutter. We can
also see that under the influence of shadow occlusion, the
baseline of applying VSS block has a large holes part, and
after our proposed GLVSS block can effectively mitigate the
shadow noise interference, reducing the generation of holes,
and improving the segmentation performance.
2) Effectiveness of SCPP Module: Table I demonstrates that
mF1, OA, and mIoU are improved by 0.35%, 0.36%, and
0.61% after adding the SCPP module to the model, respectively, which exhibits the effectiveness of the SCPP module.
The “Low Vegetation” category has the greatest enhancement
with a growth rate of 0.43%, followed by the “Building”
category which has improved by 0.41%.
As can been seen in the first row of Fig. 6, before the introduction of the SCPP module block, the baseline incorrectly
recognizes the part of the car other than the front end as the
building class because the rear part of the car is very similar
to the texture of the surrounding buildings, which produces
a high interclass similarity phenomenon. After incorporating
the SCPP module, the model successfully identifies the car
part. As can be seen from the second row of Fig. 6, before
adding the SCPP module, the texture and color of the middle
part of the building are quite different from the other buildings,
which makes it difficult for the model to identify and produces

a high intraclass variation phenomenon, which leads to the
hole phenomenon and misclassification problem. Compared
with the ASPP module, with the introduction of the SCPP
module, it is able to better adaptively fuse features, leading to a
significant reduction in the occurrence of hole within buildings
and a substantial enhancement in segmentation performance.
From the visualization experiments, it is concluded that the
SCPP module mitigates the hole phenomenon and also reduces
the false and missed detections of the model.
3) Joint Effectiveness: As shown in Table I, with the
combining of both the GLVSS block and the SCPP module, the
model’s segmentation accuracy increases by 0.39% for mF1,
0.44% for OA, and 0.77% for mIoU. The “Building” category
improves the most with 0.53%. This is followed by 0.5%
for the “Tree” category. The other three categories, including
“Car” and “Impervious Surface,” also see improvements of
0.48%, while “Low Vegetation” improved by 0.17%.
As shown in the first row of Fig. 6, GLVmamba accurately
identifies cars and clutter, and better distinguishes between
buildings and impervious surfaces. As illustrated in the second
row of Fig. 6, GLVmamba fully recognizes buildings without
generating any holes. This demonstrates that by effectively
integrating the GLVSS block and the SCPP module, GLVmamba is able to more accurately identify objects and mitigate
the hole phenomenon, significantly enhancing the model’s
resistance to interference and ultimately yielding more precise
segmentation results.
4) Setting the Quantity of GLVSS Blocks in the Decoder:
Based on the analysis of the VSS blocks in [29], we investigate the depth of the second stage in the designed GLVSS
block decoding block. The experiments are performed on the
Potsdam test set with depths of 2, 4, 6, 9, and 12 for the
second stage and are evaluated concerning mF1, OA, mIoU,
and Params. The specific results are shown in Fig. 7. When

Authorized licensed use limited to: FUDAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on November 16,2025 at 13:26:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4412115

Fig. 7. Bar graph approach illustrates the effect of the number of GLVSS
blocks on the segmentation performance. The four plots represent mF1, OA,
mIoU, and Parms from the Potsdam test set.

the number of blocks is [2, 9, 2, 2], the model achieves
the best segmentation performance, and mF1, OA, and mIoU
are 93.12%, 91.97%, and 87.36%, respectively, demonstrating
that this configuration provides the optimal balance between
model depth and performance. In terms of parameters, it can
be observed that the parameters increase with depth. For
the depth of the second stage of the decoder, increasing the
depth can improve the detail recovery effect and enhance
the feature fusion capability. Experiments show that a depth
setting of nine blocks can achieve desirable results in processing advanced semantic features while avoiding unnecessary
complexity increase. When the depth reaches 12 blocks, the
model’s performance declines compared with the nine blocks,
with mF1, OA, and mIoU decrease by 0.06%, 0.08%, and
0.12%, respectively, likely due to either overfitting or vanishing gradient issues that hinder effective backpropagation.
Overall, despite an increase of 1.54M in the number of
model parameters in the [2,9,2,2] condition, the mF1, OA,
and mIoU reached optimum, and thus [2,9,2,2] is chosen
as the experimental block number as it maximizes all the
three accuracy metrics while maintaining good generalization
ability and avoiding the overfitting observed in deeper models,
demonstrating that decoder depth requires careful balancing
between semantic extraction capability and model complexity
for optimal RSI segmentation.
D. Comparison to the State-of-the-Art Methods
To show the effectiveness of GLVMamba, we analyze
GLVMamba in comparison to other methods, including
CNN-based methods such as FCN [10], DeepLabV3+ [19],
DANet [66], MAResUNet [67], MANet [68], CANet [69],
and EIGNet [70], and the SegFormer [71], UPerNet [72],
CMTFNet [73], and SCTNet [74] based on hybrid CNNs and
transformer models, and also comparing with other methods
that use the Mamba structure such as RTMamba [53] and
RS3 Mamba [31].

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

1) FCN: FCN is capable of classifying input images pixelby-pixel using convolutional and deconvolutional layers.
2) DeepLabV3+: DeepLabV3+ is an enhanced semantic
segmentation model that achieves high-precision image
segmentation by combining atrous spatial pyramid pooling and encoder–decoder structure.
3) DANet: DANet achieves more accurate semantic segmentation by feature enhancement in both the spatial
and channel dimensions through the dual-attention
mechanism.
4) MAResUNet: MAResUNet proposes a linear attention
mechanism (LAM) and reconstructed the original U-Net.
5) MANet: MANet proposes a network that integrates
multiscale awareness through its relational framework,
which improves the characterization ability and segmentation accuracy of multiscale information.
6) CANet: CANet enhances the integration and combination of features from various levels by introducing the
communication mutual attention (CMA) and communication self-attention (CSA) modules, thus improving the
accuracy of semantic segmentation.
7) EIGNet: EIGNet combines spatial semantic feature
aggregation by introducing edge information guidance
and orientation convolution to enhance the semantic
segmentation accuracy and edge localization accuracy
of high-resolution RSIs.
8) SegFormer: SegFormer is an efficient semantic segmentation framework that combines a transformer with
a lightweight MLP to provide powerful representation
capabilities.
9) UPerNet: UPerNet is a multitask framework designed
for unified perceptual parsing tasks, capable of efficiently segmenting and recognizing multiple visual
concepts from images.
10) CMTFNet: CMTFNet fuses CNN and multiscale transformer to achieve accurate segmentation of RSIs by
combining local information and multiscale global context information.
11) SCTNet: SCTNet is a single-branch CNN that incorporates transformer, capturing rich semantic information
by introducing transformer branches in training, while
retaining only efficient single-branch CNNs in inference
for real-time semantic segmentation.
12) RTMamba: RTMamba is a novel framework designed
for real-time segmentation tasks in RS, combining VSS
blocks and inverted triangle pyramid pooling modules to
achieve efficient segmentation performance on limited
resources platforms while capturing long-range dependencies and boundary awareness.
13) RS3 Mamba: RS3 Mamba is a new type of dual-branch
network that combines VSS modules with CNNs, which
improves the global context capture and modeling capability of RSIs’ semantic segmentation by collaborative
completion module.
1) Comparisons on the Potsdam Dataset: We present the
quantitative results of other methods on the Potsdam dataset
in Table II to further demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed GLVMamba. As can be seen from the table, our method

Authorized licensed use limited to: FUDAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on November 16,2025 at 13:26:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LI et al.: GLVMamba: A GLOBAL–LOCAL VISUAL STATE-SPACE MODEL FOR RS IMAGE SEGMENTATION

4412115

TABLE II
C OMPARISON OF S EGMENTATION R ESULTS ON THE P OTSDAM DATASET (B OLD : B EST R ESULTS )

also outperforms the other methods in three metrics, reaching
93.12%, 91.97%, and 87.36%, respectively. Compared with
the second-best method, RTMamba, it is important to highlight
that RTMamba uses the pretraining weights from VMambatiny [29], which was trained on a large number of external
datasets, to enhance its effectiveness. In contrast, our model
does not rely on the pretraining weights of VMamba-tiny due
to modifications in the internal structure of the VSS block.
Our approach achieves higher segmentation accuracy than
RTMamba across three metrics by solely using its own training
data. Specifically, the mF1 score improves by 0.26%, the mIoU
increases by 0.15%, and the OA rises by 0.41%. These results
demonstrate the potential of the proposed method. On F1 in
each category, GLVMamba is optimal in “Impervious Surface”
and “Building,” and the other three categories also show good
results.
We visualize a qualitative comparison of GLVMamba with
other methods in Fig. 8. In the red boxes in rows 1 and 3,
we can see that GLVMamba can achieve better prediction and
its performance is better than other methods in dealing with
the cases of roads that are difficult to recognize due to being
occluded and trees that are hard to distinguish due to similar
textures. In addition, in the second row of figure, GLVMamba
can effectively address the issue of target object omission and
misdetection, realizing more accurate object segmentation and
also providing a better target contour. The contribution of the
combination of our proposed GLVSS block and SCPP module
is effectively verified. However, it can also be seen that in the
green box part of the fourth line our model, although it can
improve the RSI segmentation in general, it does not perform
very well in identifying some dense areas such as cars and
clutter with their textures, colors, and their similarities, which
we attribute to the fact that it is not sufficient in the local
feature extraction of the small target objects, and there is still
significant potential for enhancement.
2) Comparisons on the Vaihingen Dataset: The quantitative
results of our proposed method with other state-of-the-art
methods on the Vaihingen dataset are exhibited in Table III,

and the proposed GLVMamba achieves 91.47%, 93.60%, and
84.59% for mF1, OA, and mIoU, respectively. All the three
metrics are superior to other methods. Compared with the suboptimal method RTMamba, the mF1 improves by 0.39%, the
mIoU also improves by 0.67%, and the OA even improves by
2.3%, and among the F1 scores of each category, our proposed
GLVMamba achieves the optimal level in Impervious surface,
which improves by 3.27% over the suboptimal method.
To evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of other methods
compared with our proposed GLVMamba, we visualize the
prediction results of several methods in Fig. 9. As can be seen
in rows 1, 3, and 4 of the figure, due to noisy images such
as lighting, which confuse the semantics of the segmented
objects, certain methods such as DANet produce erroneous
segmentation phenomena and poor segmentation performance.
This is due to these methods do not fully use the global
and local context information, which ultimately leads to the
misrecognition of objects in the complex region of RSIs.
In contrast, GLVMamba is still able to effectively achieve
more accurate classification prediction. Meanwhile, in the
second row, small objects such as cars are prone to misclassification due to blurred edges and shadow coverage when
they are closely connected. The proposed GLVMamba can
significantly improve this situation and obtain good segmentation edges. This is consistent with our expectation that the
enhancement of segmentation performance can be effectively
achieved by combining global and local effective information.
3) Complexity Comparison: We measure the complexity
analysis with the number of parameters measured in millions (M) and floating-point operations per second (FLOPS)
for each model. All the numbers are obtained on a single
NVIDIA 3090 GPU, and the results are shown in Table IV.
Most CNN-based models have significantly fewer parameters than transformer-based models. Although the number of
parameters is relatively low, the lack of attention to global
information makes the CNN-based model inferior, proving that
the extraction of global information is crucial. Compared with
CMTFNet, it is obvious that the proposed GLVMamba can

Authorized licensed use limited to: FUDAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on November 16,2025 at 13:26:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4412115

Fig. 8.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

Comparison of the proposed GLVMamba with other methods on the Potsdam dataset.
TABLE III
C OMPARISON OF S EGMENTATION R ESULTS ON THE VAIHINGEN DATASET (B OLD : B EST R ESULTS )

Fig. 9.

Comparison of the proposed GLVMamba to other methods on the Vaihingen dataset.

still obtain high segmentation performance with low model
scale and computational complexity, which proves that our

method is effective in introducing Mamba into RS semantic
segmentation tasks. Meanwhile, compared with RS3 Mamba,

Authorized licensed use limited to: FUDAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on November 16,2025 at 13:26:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LI et al.: GLVMamba: A GLOBAL–LOCAL VISUAL STATE-SPACE MODEL FOR RS IMAGE SEGMENTATION

4412115

TABLE IV
C OMPLEXITY A NALYSIS OF THE VAIHINGEN DATASET (B OLD : B EST R ESULTS , ↓: L OW VALUES A RE B ETTER R ESULTS ,
AND ↑: H IGH VALUES A RE B ETTER R ESULTS )

the parameter number and FLOPs decreased by 19.13M and
23.98G, respectively, and mIoU also increased by 1.81%, indicating the effectiveness of the improved GLMmamba block.
V. C ONCLUSION
In this article, the proposed GLVMamba is an RS semantic
segmentation network that combines CNNs and the improved
Mamba structures. The GLVSS block is proposed to construct
the core decoder for the deficiency of insufficient modeling
of neighboring pixel dependencies of SS2D, which enhances
the integration of global and local context during feature
reconstruction, boosts object perception capabilities of the
model, and effectively refines edge contours. In addition, the
SCPP module is proposed to fully merge the features from
various scales and adaptively fuse and extract the distinguishing features to mitigate the holes and false detections due to
the light and other factors. The GLVMamba effectively captures global–local semantic information and multiscale feature
through the GLVSS block and the SCPP module, achieving
efficient and accurate RS semantic segmentation. Extensive
experimental results on the Potsdam and Vaihingen datasets
demonstrate that the proposed GLVMamba outperforms the
state-of-the-art methods, thereby verifying its effectiveness and
superiority.
However, the GLVMamba still has limitations when dealing
with dense small objects, primarily due to the lack of modules
in our method that addresses boundary blurring and shadow
occlusion in these objects. To this end, we plan to further
optimize the model’s performance in the future by thoroughly
investigating boundary detection methods and exploring how
to make full use of the limited occlusion pixel information
to improve the segmentation accuracy. In addition, we will
consider adding validation sets in future work and further
evaluate their impact on model performance.
R EFERENCES
[1] S. Minaee, Y. Boykov, F. Porikli, A. Plaza, N. Kehtarnavaz, and
D. Terzopoulos, “Image segmentation using deep learning: A survey,”
IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 44, no. 7, pp. 3523–3542,
Jul. 2021.
[2] Y. Mo, Y. Wu, X. Yang, F. Liu, and Y. Liao, “Review the state-ofthe-art technologies of semantic segmentation based on deep learning,”
Neurocomputing, vol. 493, pp. 626–646, Jul. 2022.

[3] Z. Shao, P. Tang, Z. Wang, N. Saleem, S. Yam, and C. Sommai,
“BRRNet: A fully convolutional neural network for automatic building
extraction from high-resolution remote sensing images,” Remote Sens.,
vol. 12, no. 6, p. 1050, Mar. 2020.
[4] J. Chen, M. Xia, D. Wang, and H. Lin, “Double branch parallel network
for segmentation of buildings and waters in remote sensing images,”
Remote Sens., vol. 15, no. 6, p. 1536, Mar. 2023.
[5] V. Maus, G. Câmara, R. Cartaxo, A. Sanchez, F. M. Ramos, and
G. R. de Queiroz, “A time-weighted dynamic time warping method for
land-use and land-cover mapping,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth
Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 3729–3739, Aug. 2016.
[6] F. X. Ru, M. A. Zulkifley, S. R. Abdani, and M. Spraggon, “Forest
segmentation with spatial pyramid pooling modules: A surveillance
system based on satellite images,” Forests, vol. 14, no. 2, p. 405,
Feb. 2023.
[7] H. F. Tolie, J. Ren, and E. Elyan, “DICAM: Deep inception and
channel-wise attention modules for underwater image enhancement,”
Neurocomputing, vol. 584, Jun. 2024, Art. no. 127585.
[8] Y. Li et al., “CBANet: An end-to-end cross-band 2D attention network
for hyperspectral change detection in remote sensing,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5513011.
[9] L. Sahar, S. Muthukumar, and S. P. French, “Using aerial imagery and
GIS in automated building footprint extraction and shape recognition for
earthquake risk assessment of urban inventories,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 48, no. 9, pp. 3511–3520, Sep. 2010.
[10] J. Long, E. Shelhamer, and T. Darrell, “Fully convolutional networks
for semantic segmentation,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2015, pp. 3431–3440.
[11] Y. Zhang, Z. Qiu, T. Yao, D. Liu, and T. Mei, “Fully convolutional
adaptation networks for semantic segmentation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2018, pp. 6810–6818.
[12] Y. Li, H. Qi, J. Dai, X. Ji, and Y. Wei, “Fully convolutional instanceaware semantic segmentation,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit., Jul. 2017, pp. 2359–2367.
[13] V. Badrinarayanan, A. Kendall, and R. Cipolla, “SegNet: A deep
convolutional encoder–decoder architecture for image segmentation,”
IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 39, no. 12, pp. 2481–2495,
Dec. 2017.
[14] I. Alonso and A. C. Murillo, “EV-SegNet: Semantic segmentation for
event-based cameras,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. Workshops (CVPRW), Jun. 2019, p. 0.
[15] A. Abdollahi, B. Pradhan, and A. M. Alamri, “An ensemble architecture
of deep convolutional segnet and unet networks for building semantic
segmentation from high-resolution aerial images,” Geocarto Int., vol. 37,
no. 12, pp. 3355–3370, Jun. 2022.
[16] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox, “U-Net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image segmentation,” in Proc. 18th Int. Conf.
Med. Image Comput. Comput.-Assist. Intervent., vol. 9351. Cham,
Switzerland: Springer, 2015, pp. 234–241.
[17] N. Siddique, S. Paheding, C. P. Elkin, and V. Devabhaktuni, “UNet and its variants for medical image segmentation: A review of
theory and applications,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 82031–82057,
2021.

Authorized licensed use limited to: FUDAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on November 16,2025 at 13:26:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4412115

[18] M. Z. Alom, C. Yakopcic, M. Hasan, T. M. Taha, and V. K. Asari,
“Recurrent residual U-Net for medical image segmentation,” J. Med.
Imag., vol. 6, no. 1, Mar. 2019, Art. no. 014006.
[19] L.-C. Chen, Y. Zhu, G. Papandreou, F. Schroff, and H. Adam,
“Encoder–decoder with atrous separable convolution for semantic
image segmentation,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV), 2018,
pp. 801–818.
[20] Z. Chang et al., “Crop type identification using high-resolution remote
sensing images based on an improved DeepLabV3+ network,” Remote
Sens., vol. 15, no. 21, p. 5088, Oct. 2023.
[21] L.-C. Chen, G. Papandreou, F. Schroff, and H. Adam, “Rethinking atrous
convolution for semantic image segmentation,” 2017, arXiv:1706.05587.
[22] H. Zhao, J. Shi, X. Qi, X. Wang, and J. Jia, “Pyramid scene parsing
network,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
Jul. 2017, pp. 2881–2890.
[23] J. Zhou, M. Hao, D. Zhang, P. Zou, and W. Zhang, “Fusion PSPnet
image segmentation based method for multi-focus image fusion,” IEEE
Photon. J., vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 1–12, Dec. 2019.
[24] X. Chen, D. Li, M. Liu, and J. Jia, “CNN and transformer fusion for
remote sensing image semantic segmentation,” Remote Sens., vol. 15,
no. 18, p. 4455, Sep. 2023.
[25] X. He, Y. Zhou, J. Zhao, D. Zhang, R. Yao, and Y. Xue, “Swin
transformer embedding UNet for remote sensing image semantic
segmentation,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
Art. no. 4408715.
[26] X. Xiong, X. Wang, J. Zhang, B. Huang, and R. Du, “TCUNet: A
lightweight dual-branch parallel network for sea–land segmentation
in remote sensing images,” Remote Sens., vol. 15, no. 18, p. 4413,
Sep. 2023.
[27] A. Gu and T. Dao, “Mamba: Linear-time sequence modeling with
selective state spaces,” 2023, arXiv:2312.00752.
[28] L. Zhu, B. Liao, Q. Zhang, X. Wang, W. Liu, and X. Wang, “Vision
mamba: Efficient visual representation learning with bidirectional state
space model,” 2024, arXiv:2401.09417.
[29] Y. Liu et al., “VMamba: Visual state space model,” 2024,
arXiv:2401.10166.
[30] K. Chen, B. Chen, C. Liu, W. Li, Z. Zou, and Z. Shi, “RSMamba:
Remote sensing image classification with state space model,” IEEE
Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 21, pp. 1–5, 2024.
[31] X. Ma, X. Zhang, and M.-O. Pun, “RS3Mamba: Visual state space model
for remote sensing image semantic segmentation,” IEEE Geosci. Remote
Sens. Lett., vol. 21, pp. 1–5, 2024.
[32] G. Chen, X. Zhang, Q. Wang, F. Dai, Y. Gong, and K. Zhu, “Symmetrical
dense-shortcut deep fully convolutional networks for semantic segmentation of very-high-resolution remote sensing images,” IEEE J. Sel.
Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 11, no. 5, pp. 1633–1644,
May 2018.
[33] Z. Ma, Z. Jiang, and H. Zhang, “Hyperspectral image classification using
feature fusion hypergraph convolution neural network,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5517314.
[34] B. Dang, Y. Li, Y. Zhang, and J. Ma, “Progressive learning with crosswindow consistency for semi-supervised semantic segmentation,” IEEE
Trans. Image Process., vol. 33, pp. 5219–5231, 2024.
[35] Y. Li, T. Shi, Y. Zhang, and J. Ma, “SPGAN-DA: Semantic-preserved
generative adversarial network for domain adaptive remote sensing
image semantic segmentation,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5406717.
[36] X. Lu, Z. Jiang, and H. Zhang, “Weakly supervised remote sensing
image semantic segmentation with pseudo label noise suppression,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5406912.
[37] R. Li et al., “DeepUNet: A deep fully convolutional network
for pixel-level sea-land segmentation,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl.
Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 11, no. 11, pp. 3954–3962,
Nov. 2018.
[38] Y. Hou, Z. Liu, T. Zhang, and Y. Li, “C-UNet: Complement UNet
for remote sensing road extraction,” Sensors, vol. 21, no. 6, p. 2153,
Mar. 2021.
[39] Z. Wang, J. Wang, K. Yang, L. Wang, F. Su, and X. Chen, “Semantic
segmentation of high-resolution remote sensing images based on a class
feature attention mechanism fused with Deeplabv3+,” Comput. Geosci.,
vol. 158, Jan. 2022, Art. no. 104969.
[40] A. Arnab, M. Dehghani, G. Heigold, C. Sun, M. Lucic, and C. Schmid,
“ViViT: A video vision transformer,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf.
Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2021, pp. 6836–6846.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

[41] X. Zhou, L. Zhou, S. Gong, S. Zhong, W. Yan, and Y. Huang, “Swin
transformer embedding dual-stream for semantic segmentation of remote
sensing imagery,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens.,
vol. 17, pp. 175–189, 2024.
[42] C. Zhang, W. Jiang, Y. Zhang, W. Wang, Q. Zhao, and C. Wang, “Transformer and CNN hybrid deep neural network for semantic segmentation
of very-high-resolution remote sensing imagery,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 4408820.
[43] Y. Chen, Y. Wang, S. Xiong, X. Lu, X. X. Zhu, and L. Mou, “Integrating detailed features and global contexts for semantic segmentation
in ultrahigh-resolution remote sensing images,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 4703914.
[44] A. Kirillov et al., “Segment anything,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf.
Comput. Vis., Oct. 2023, pp. 4015–4026.
[45] J. Dong et al., “Dual hyperspectral mamba for efficient spectral compressive imaging,” 2024, arXiv:2406.00449.
[46] H. Zhang, K. Chen, C. Liu, H. Chen, Z. Zou, and Z. Shi, “CDMamba:
Incorporating local clues into mamba for remote sensing image binary
change detection,” 2024, arXiv:2406.04207.
[47] W. Zhou, S.-I. Kamata, H. Wang, M.-S. Wong, and H. Hou, “Mambain-mamba: Centralized mamba-cross-scan in tokenized mamba model
for hyperspectral image classification,” Neurocomputing, vol. 613,
Jan. 2025, Art. no. 128751.
[48] J. Liu et al., “Swin-UMamba: Mamba-based UNet with ImageNet-based
pretraining,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Med. Image Comput. Comput.-Assist.
Intervent. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, Feb. 2024, pp. 615–625.
[49] K. S. Sanjid, M. T. Hossain, M. S. S. Junayed, and M. M. Uddin, “Integrating mamba sequence model and hierarchical upsampling network
for accurate semantic segmentation of multiple sclerosis legion,” 2024,
arXiv:2403.17432.
[50] Z. Wan et al., “Sigma: Siamese mamba network for multi-modal
semantic segmentation,” 2024, arXiv:2404.04256.
[51] J. Ruan, J. Li, and S. Xiang, “VM-UNet: Vision mamba UNet for
medical image segmentation,” 2024, arXiv:2402.02491.
[52] Q. Zhu et al., “Samba: Semantic segmentation of remotely sensed images
with state space model,” 2024, arXiv:2404.01705.
[53] H. Ding et al., “A novel mamba architecture with a semantic transformer
for efficient real-time remote sensing semantic segmentation,” Remote
Sens., vol. 16, no. 14, p. 2620, Jul. 2024.
[54] T. Y. Lin, P. Dollàr, R. Girshick, K. He, B. Hariharan, and S. Belongie,
“Feature pyramid networks for object detection,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jul. 2017, pp. 2117–2125.
[55] M. Wang, C. Zhu, and X. Chen, “Building change detection in highresolution remote sensing images based on FPN res-UNet,” J. Jilin Univ.,
Earth Sci. Edn., vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 296–303, Mar. 2021.
[56] Y. Gu, B. Wang, and B. Xu, “A FPN-based framework for vehicle
detection in aerial images,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Video Image Process.,
Dec. 2018, pp. 60–64.
[57] W. Liu, Y. Shu, X. Tang, and J. Liu, “Remote sensing image segmentation using dual attention mechanism deeplabv3+ algorithm,” Tropical
Geography, vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 303–313, Aug. 2020.
[58] Y. Li et al., “MFVNet: A deep adaptive fusion network with multiple
field-of-views for remote sensing image semantic segmentation,” Sci.
China Inf. Sci., vol. 66, no. 4, Apr. 2023, Art. no. 140305.
[59] P. Ma et al., “Multiscale superpixelwise prophet model for noise-robust
feature extraction in hyperspectral images,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5508912.
[60] T. Huang, X. Pei, S. You, F. Wang, C. Qian, and C. Xu, “LocalMamba: Visual state space model with windowed selective scan,” 2024,
arXiv:2403.09338.
[61] Z. Liu et al., “Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using
shifted windows,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV),
Oct. 2021, pp. 10012–10022.
[62] D. Lian, Z. Yu, X. Sun, and S. Gao, “AS-MLP: An axial shifted MLP
architecture for vision,” 2021, arXiv:2107.08391.
[63] R. Hang, P. Yang, F. Zhou, and Q. Liu, “Multiscale progressive segmentation network for high-resolution remote sensing imagery,” IEEE
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5412012.
[64] J. Hou, Z. Guo, Y. Wu, W. Diao, and T. Xu, “BSNet: Dynamic hybrid
gradient convolution based boundary-sensitive network for remote sensing image segmentation,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60,
2022, Art. no. 5604912.
[65] L. Wang et al., “UNetFormer: A UNet-like transformer for efficient
semantic segmentation of remote sensing urban scene imagery,” ISPRS
J. Photogramm. Remote Sens., vol. 190, pp. 196–214, Aug. 2022.

Authorized licensed use limited to: FUDAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on November 16,2025 at 13:26:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LI et al.: GLVMamba: A GLOBAL–LOCAL VISUAL STATE-SPACE MODEL FOR RS IMAGE SEGMENTATION

[66] J. Fu et al., “Dual attention network for scene segmentation,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2019,
pp. 3146–3154.
[67] R. Li, S. Zheng, C. Duan, J. Su, and C. Zhang, “Multistage attention
ResU-net for semantic segmentation of fine-resolution remote sensing
images,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 19, pp. 1–5, 2022.
[68] P. He et al., “MANet: Multi-scale aware-relation network for semantic
segmentation in aerial scenes,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5624615.
[69] X. Meng, L. Zhu, Y. Han, and H. Zhang, “We need to communicate:
Communicating attention network for semantic segmentation of highresolution remote sensing images,” Remote Sens., vol. 15, no. 14,
p. 3619, Jul. 2023.
[70] B. Liu, J. Hu, X. Bi, W. Li, and X. Gao, “PGNet: Positioning guidance network for semantic segmentation of very-high-resolution remote
sensing images,” Remote Sens., vol. 14, no. 17, p. 4219, Aug. 2022.
[71] E. Xie et al., “SegFormer: Simple and efficient design for semantic
segmentation with transformers,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.
(NIPS), vol. 34, Dec. 2021, pp. 12077–12090.
[72] T. Xiao, Y. Liu, B. Zhou, Y. Jiang, and J. Sun, “Unified perceptual
parsing for scene understanding,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis.
(ECCV), 2018, pp. 418–434.
[73] H. Wu, P. Huang, M. Zhang, W. Tang, and X. Yu, “CMTFNet: CNN and
multiscale transformer fusion network for remote-sensing image semantic segmentation,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023,
Art. no. 2004612.
[74] Z. Xu, D. Wu, C. Yu, X. Chu, N. Sang, and C. Gao, “SCTNet:
Single-branch CNN with transformer semantic information for real-time
segmentation,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., Mar. 2024, vol. 38,
no. 6, pp. 6378–6386.

Huihui Li (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
degree in computer science and engineering from
South China University of Technology, Guangzhou,
China, in 2019.
She is currently an Associate Professor with the
School of Computer Science, Guangdong Polytechnic Normal University, Guangzhou, and a
Senior Researcher with the Engineering Technology Research Center of Artificial Intelligence
in Traditional Chinese Medicine of Guangdong
Province, Guangzhou. Her research interests include
remote sensing image analysis, multimedia signal processing, and affective
computing.
Dr. Li is a member of the Special Committee on Affective Computing and
Understanding of Chinese Society of Image and Graphics.

Huajian Pan received the B.S. degree in data
science and big data technology from Guangdong
Polytechnic Normal University, Guangzhou, China,
in 2023, where he is currently pursuing the master’s
degree with the School of Computer Science.
His research interests include deep learning and
remote sensing image processing.

4412115

Xiaoyong Liu received the Ph.D. degree from the
National Science Library, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China, in 2011.
He is currently a Professor with the School of
Data Science and Engineering, Guangdong Polytechnic Normal University, Guangzhou, China, and
the Director of the Big Data Engineering Technology
Research Center for the Integration of Production
and Education of Guangdong Province, Guangzhou.
His research interests include image processing, pattern recognition, and big data analytics.
Dr. Liu is the Vice Chairperson of Guangdong System Engineering Society.

Jinchang Ren (Senior Member, IEEE) received
the B.E. degree in computer software, the M.Eng.
degree in image processing, and the D.Eng. degree
in computer vision from Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China, in 1992, 1997, and
2000, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in electronic
imaging and media communication from the University of Bradford, Bradford, U.K., in 2009.
He is currently a Professor with the National
Subsea Centre, Robert Gordon University, Aberdeen,
U.K., and also a Visiting Professor with Guangdong
Polytechnic Normal University, Guangzhou, China. He has published more
than 350 articles. His research interests include computer vision and multimedia signal processing, especially on hyperspectral imaging, machine learning,
and big data analytics.
Dr. Ren is as an Associate Editor for five international journals, including IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON G EOSCIENCE AND R EMOTE S ENSING, The
Journal of the Franklin Institute, and Big Data Analytics.

Zhiguo Du (Senior Member, IEEE) is currently
the Chairperson of Guangzhou Engineering Management Institute, Guangzhou, China, and an Associate
Professor with South China Agricultural University
(SCAU), Guangzhou, where he is also the Director
of the Information Network Center. He has published
more than 40 papers in journals and conferences
and two monograph books. His research interests are
network communication, machine learning, artificial
intelligence, and big data modeling.
Dr. Du is a Senior Member of China Computer
Federation (CCF).

Jingjing Cao received the B.S. degree in geographic information system from Xinyang Normal
University, Xinyang, China, in 2011, and the M.S.
and Ph.D. degrees in cartography and geographic
information system from Sun Yat-sen University,
Guangzhou, China, in 2013 and 2019, respectively.
She is currently a Lecturer with the College of
Computer Sciences, Guangdong Polytechnic Normal University, Guangzhou. Her research interests
include vegetation remote sensing and urban remote
sensing.

Authorized licensed use limited to: FUDAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on November 16,2025 at 13:26:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

