IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

5001815

ASCNet: Asymmetric Sampling Correction
Network for Infrared Image Destriping
Shuai Yuan , Hanlin Qin , Member, IEEE, Xiang Yan , Member, IEEE, Shiqi Yang , Shuowen Yang ,
Naveed Akhtar , Member, IEEE, and Huixin Zhou, Member, IEEE

Abstract— In a real-world infrared (IR) imaging system,
effectively learning a consistent stripe noise removal model
is essential. Most existing destriping methods cannot precisely
reconstruct images due to cross-level semantic gaps and insufficient characterization of the global column features. To tackle
this problem, we propose a novel IR image destriping method,
called asymmetric sampling correction network (ASCNet), that
can effectively capture global column relationships and embed
them into a U-shaped framework, providing comprehensive
discriminative representation and seamless semantic connectivity.
Our ASCNet consists of three core elements: residual Haar
discrete wavelet transform (RHDWT), pixel shuffle (PS), and
column nonuniformity correction module (CNCM). Specifically,
RHDWT is a novel downsampler that employs double-branch
modeling to effectively integrate stripe-directional prior knowledge and data-driven semantic interaction to enrich the feature
representation. Observing the semantic patterns crosstalk of
stripe noise, PS is introduced as an upsampler to prevent excessive a priori decoding and performing semantic-bias-free image
reconstruction. After each sampling, CNCM captures the column relationships in long-range dependencies. By incorporating
column, spatial, and self-dependence information, CNCM well
establishes a global context to distinguish stripes from the scene’s
vertical structures. Extensive experiments on synthetic data, real
data, and IR small target detection (IRSTD) tasks demonstrate
that the proposed method outperforms state-of-the-art singleimage destriping methods both visually and quantitatively. The
code is available at https://github.com/xdFai/ASCNet.
Index Terms— Asymmetric sampling (AS), column correction,
deep learning, infrared (IR) image destriping, wavelet transform.

I. I NTRODUCTION

I

NFRARED (IR) imaging systems find wide applications
in security monitoring, sea surveillance, and urban traffic [1], [2], [3]. However, due to the unique thermal imaging

Received 30 August 2024; revised 19 December 2024 and 17 January
2025; accepted 23 January 2025. Date of publication 27 January 2025; date
of current version 25 February 2025. This work was supported in part by
Shaanxi Province Key Research and Development Plan Project under Grant
2022JBGS2-09; in part by the 111 Project under Grant B17035; and in part by
the Technology Area Foundation of China under Grant 2021-JJ-1244, Grant
2021-JJ-0471, and Grant 2023-JJ-0148. (Corresponding authors: Hanlin Qin;
Xiang Yan.)
Shuai Yuan, Hanlin Qin, Xiang Yan, Shiqi Yang, and Shuowen Yang are
with the School of Optoelectronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an
710071, China (e-mail: yuansy@stu.xidian.edu.cn; hlqin@mail.xidian.edu.cn;
xyan@xidian.edu.cn; 643722161@qq.com; shuowenyang@xidian.edu.cn).
Naveed Akhtar is with the School of Computing and Information Systems,
Faculty of Engineering and IT, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC
3052, Australia (e-mail: naveed.akhtar1@unimelb.edu.au).
Huixin Zhou is with the School of Physics, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071,
China (e-mail: hxzhou@mail.xidian.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TGRS.2025.3534838

mechanism of IR detectors, the varying responses of the
focal plane array (FPA), and its columnar signal readout
manner, even corrected IR images can still exhibit various
types of column stripe noise under rapid external temperature
fluctuations [4]. This adversely affects the visual quality of
images and downstream tasks, e.g., IR small target detection
(IRSTD) [3], [5]. Thus, eradicating stripe noise from IR
images is a crucial task.
A degraded IR stripy image (I D ) can be represented as
follows:
I D = I N + IC

(1)

where I N denotes the stripe noise and IC represents the clean
image. Recovering IC from I D is the primary objective of
image destriping methods. The challenges arising from the
dynamic scenes have prompted the development of numerous
techniques for single-image destriping [6], [7], [8]. Early
methods employed handcrafted features, such as filters [9],
[10], [11], data statistics [12], [13], [14], and optimization
techniques [15], [16], [17] to distinguish between background
and stripe components. Due to an over-reliance on empirical
observation of image properties, these methods only achieve
acceptable performance for relatively simple scenes.
Owing to the powerful feature representation abilities of
convolutional neural networks (CNNs), learning-based methods have demonstrated more promising destriping results
for complex scenarios. Initial approaches utilize shallow
networks to mitigate stripe noise [18], [19]. However, inadequate convolution layers lead to a small receptive field and
limited high-level semantic understanding. To address this
issue, He et al. [20], Li et al. [21], and Lee and Ro [22]
employed residual learning strategies to achieve sufficient
characterization with deeper networks. Subsequently, multiscale modeling [23], [24], [25] and attention mechanism [26],
[27], [28] have emerged as useful paradigms for IR image
destriping. Considering the column signal readout of FPA,
some methods also explored noise response characteristics to predict stripe distribution and achieved acceptable
results [29], [30].
Since stripe noise vertically compromises the image structure, i.e., it primarily degrades the image’s horizontal gradient.
Benefiting from the powerful capabilities in gradient modeling,
2-D discrete wavelet transform (DWT) has received considerable attention in image destriping tasks [31], [32], [33].
As illustrated in Fig. 1(b), given a stripy image P, DWT can
reorganize stripe noise into the image’s low-frequency subband

1558-0644 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: China Three Gorges University. Downloaded on March 20,2025 at 13:05:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5001815

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

A. IDWT Disrupts the Cross-Level Column Semantic
Connectivity in Wavelet U-Shaped Framework
Given a stripe feature S before downsampling—see
Fig. 1(c), although the DWT aggregates stripe noise into the Sll
and Shl , the channel-wise information interaction mechanism
in convolution layers causes the stripe noise to repollute the
vertical gradient subband Klh and diagonal subband Khh .
With an inaccurate predetermined noise pattern distribution,
the IDWT disrupts the column-wise response connectivity of
features, creating a cross-level column semantic gap. As shown
in Fig. 2(a), this semantic gap causes the restored image to
deviate from the true column distribution.
B. Independent Downsampling Branch Is Insufficient to
Comprehensively Depict Stripy Features

Fig. 1.
(a) Wavelet U-shaped neural network. (b) DWT decomposition
and reconstruction of the stripy image P. (c) DWT decomposition and
reconstruction of the stripy feature S in wavelet U-shaped neural network.
(d) Visualization of each channel of the crosstalk feature Kc .

Despite DWT modeling stripe noise directionality, it is
limited to spatial sampling without channel interaction.
On the contrary, stride convolution (SC) considers spatial
and full-semantic features but ignores the noise directional
prior. To sum up, an independent sampler often produces
varying degrees of loss in semantics and structure, leading
to insufficient feature representations [23], [34], [37].
C. Feature Enhancement Fails to Highlight the Global
Column Characteristic in Long-Range Dependence

Fig. 2. Insightful feature visualizations between (a) conventional symmetric
sampling: DWT/IDWT and (b) AS: DWT/PS during the last two stages
of upsampling. The CMRCs of feature maps (maximum the channel-wise
response) are provided to showcase the column semantic changes introduced
by upsampling. The cross-level column semantic gap in symmetric sampling
is highlighted in red boxes. We can observe that AS has stable semantic
fluctuations and clearer pointers for noise reconstruction.

Pll and horizontal gradient subband Phl , while maintaining the
cleanliness of the vertical gradient subband Plh and diagonal
subband Phh . Subsequently, inverse DWT (IDWT) can reconstruct the image P without any loss based on the orthogonality
of wavelet bases. Motivated by the DWT’s stripe decomposition ability, DWT and IDWT are naturally utilized as
paired downsamplers and upsamplers in numerous U-shaped
neural networks to build the internal directionality of stripe
noise [34], [35], [36]. Despite the impressive performance
achieved, these methods still struggle to precisely decouple
the stripe noise and vertical background details. We attribute
this phenomenon to the following three challenges.

An effective global column characteristic modeling is essential for the destriping task. While attention mechanisms [29],
[36], [38] and column calibration modules [39] have been
employed, their effectiveness is limited by the absence of
explicit modeling for column long-range dependencies, which
hinders the exploration and modulation of characteristic column patterns within the global context.
To tackle these challenges, we propose a novel IR image
destriping method, called asymmetric sampling correction
network (ASCNet), that can effectively construct a continuous semantic modeling and comprehensive representation of
global column relationships. As illustrated in Fig. 3, ASCNet
comprises three elements: 1) pixel shuffle (PS), which bridges
the cross-level column semantic gap; 2) residual Haar DWT
(RHDWT), for enriching feature characterization; and 3) the
column nonuniformity correction module (CNCM), for globally enhancing columns. The motivation of these components
is as follows.
Challenge A: Considering that PS directly reorganizes pixels
without linear computation, its weaker prior assumption may
better bridge the cross-level semantic gap [40]. Therefore,
we build the symmetric sampling (DWT/IDWT) and asymmetric sampling (AS) (DWT/PS) in Fig. 2 and showcase
the feature maps and column-wise mean responding curves
(CMRCs) of the crosstalk feature Kc and reconstructed feature
K. It can be seen that the CMRC of AS is more stable,
indicating PS’s superior semantic articulation in stripy feature
decoding. Therefore, PS is utilized for ASCNet as upsamplers
(see Section III-A).
Challenge B: Independently applying DWT for downsampling essentially serializes it with CNNs. This blocks the flow
of channel-wise semantic interaction. Therefore, the proposed

Authorized licensed use limited to: China Three Gorges University. Downloaded on March 20,2025 at 13:05:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YUAN et al.: ASCNet: ASYMMETRIC SAMPLING CORRECTION NETWORK FOR INFRARED IMAGE DESTRIPING

5001815

Fig. 3. Overview of the proposed ASCNet. Three core modules of ASCNet are (a) PS to achieve semantic-bias-free image reconstruction, (b) RHDWT that
enriches structural and semantic feature representation, and (c) CNCM nests the RCSSC block to enhance column characteristics, spatial information, and
long-range dependencies.

RHDWT has parallel model-driven and residual branches (see
Section III-C). Specifically, the model-driven branch utilizes
Haar DWT (HDWT) to incorporate stripe-directional prior
knowledge to decompose the original feature. The residual
branch complements the information of the model-driven
branch with data-driven cross-channel semantics.
Challenge C: Inspired by the success of the self-calibration
strategy in image classification [41], image deraining [42],
as well as the column-based correction module in remote
sensing image destriping [39], we present a CNCM to solve
the last challenge (see Section III-D). Specifically, CNCM by
nesting the residual column spatial self-correction (RCSSC)
block to achieve global column feature enhancement. The
RCSSC contributes three parts.
1) Column uniformity, which strengthens column characteristics to overcome the stripe noise column differences.
2) Spatial correlation, enhancing structural characterization
of key areas to decouple stripe noise.
3) Self-dependence, establishing flexible remote dependencies that aggregate contextual information to fine-tune
the global uniformity between different feature layers.
Our main contributions are summarized below.
1) We propose an ASCNet for IR image destriping. In our
technique, the stripe noise can be precisely decoupled
from the scene by continuous column semantic modeling
and comprehensive representations of global column
relationships.
2) Based on the generally observed semantic crosstalk
of stripe noise in wavelet U-shaped architectures,
we employ PS for the IR image destriping to bridge
the cross-level column semantic gap and restore images
without semantic bias.
3) We propose RHDWT as a novel downsampler, which
parallels stripe directional prior with semantic interaction for full feature description.
4) We devise a CNCM. The column characteristics of
the global context can be fully captured by integrating

long-range column uniformity, spatial correlation, and
self-dependence.
II. R ELATED W ORK
In this section, we briefly review the major works in single
IR image destriping. Following that, we introduce the studies
on wavelet U-shaped structures in image processing.
A. Single IR Image Destriping
1) Model-Based Methods: Traditional paradigms rely on
the structural properties observed in the stripe and background.
Cao et al. [9] used two orthogonal filters, a 1-D row-guided
filter, and a column-guided filter, to remove the stripe noise
in a phased manner. Yet purely handcrafted filters inevitably
blur the image texture. Since the grayscale response of each
column in the image exhibits a similar statistical distribution,
Tendero et al. [12] employed midway histogram equalization
to fine-tune pixel intensities within columns. However, the
distribution of real scenes is quite complex, and the statistical
information generated by each detector often exhibits high
variability. To solve this problem, Chang et al. [43] combined unidirectional total variation and sparse representation
to propose a joint model for removing random stripe noise.
Similarly, Li et al. [44] considered the gradient and global
sparsity of the stripe noises, treating the components along
the stripe direction as a fidelity term.
2) Learning-Based Methods: This category of methods
mainly depends on CNNs. For instance, Xiao et al. [19] integrated local and global information into CNNs and designed a
network to optimize the edge preservation performance. He et
al. [20] proposed the deep learning-based stripe nonuniformity
correction (DLS-NUC) model, utilizing an end-to-end residual
deep network. This work also introduces the first comprehensive cubic noise simulation model. Recently, multiscale
strategies have been widely used due to their ability to
extract features from different receptive fields. Xu et al. [24]
introduced a multiscale dense connection structure that can

Authorized licensed use limited to: China Three Gorges University. Downloaded on March 20,2025 at 13:05:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5001815

extract fine and coarse features for clean image recovery.
Similarly, multilevel encoder and decoder structures also get
much attention. Chang et al. [23] used a U-shape sampling
network to integrate multiscale and long–short-term residual
information for correcting image nonuniformity. Unlike these
multilevel U-shaped frameworks, which utilize existing scale
transform structures, we devise a novel RHDWT downsampler
to enrich the feature representation.
Recently, several advanced methods have combined noise
response or structural characteristics with attention mechanisms to achieve better results [45]. Guan et al. [29] designed a
cascade residual attention CNN model that estimates the gain
and bias of the noise response using two concatenated subnetworks. Taking into account the signal readout by column,
Li et al. [39] designed a column-spatial correction network
(CSCNet), utilizing CCMs with spatial attention to ensure
local consistency in uniform regions and global uniformity
in the image. Although satisfactory results are achieved, these
methods fail to fully exploit the characteristic column patterns
in a global context due to a lack of long-range dependence.
Different from CCM [39], our CNCM calculates the average
and max response of the columns in two steps. Moreover,
column responses are expanded at the final stage to vertically
calibrate the original features. Finally, a self-calibration module is incorporated to more flexibly aggregate column global
contextual information.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

III. P ROPOSED M ETHOD
We first briefly introduce the DWT in a U-shaped framework
in Section III-A, and follow by presenting the overall network
architecture of ASCNet in Section III-B. Then, we present the
technical details of the RHDWT and CNCM in Sections III-C
and III-D, respectively.
A. DWT for Stripy Features in U-Shaped Framework
DWT for image processing is extensively discussed in
MWCNN [48]. Conversely, we concentrate on the advantages
and limitations of DWT in handling stripe noise features.
As shown in Fig. 1(c), given an input stripy feature S ∈
RC×H ×W , 2-D DWT is utilized with four filters: a low-pass
filter λ ll ∈ R2×2 , and three high-pass filters λ lh ∈ R2×2 ,
λ hl ∈ R2×2 , λ hh ∈ R2×2 to decompose S into four subbands:
low-frequency subband Sll ∈ RC×H/2×W/2 , vertical gradient
subband Slh ∈ RC×H/2×W/2 , horizontal gradient subband
Shl ∈ RC×H/2×W/2 , and diagonal subband Shh ∈ RC×H/2×W/2 .
Without prejudice to generality, using the Haar wavelet as an
illustration, the four filters are defined as follows:




1 1
−1 −1
λ ll =
,
λ lh =
1 1
1
1




−1 1
1
−1
λ hl =
,
λ hh =
.
(2)
−1 1
−1
1
The operation of HDWT for feature S is defined as

B. Wavelet U-Shaped Structures in Image Processing
Owing to the DWT can extract frequency information and
acquire an acceptable receptive field [46], a large amount
of wavelet U-shaped methods have been proposed for image
processing. Wu et al. [47] present a self-attention memoryaugmented wavelet-CNN for anomaly detection, in which
DWT and IDWT are paired as samplers. Liu et al. [48]
proposed the multilevel wavelet convolutional neural networks
(MWCNNs) for image denoising. Notable, MWCNN is a
typical representative of the wavelet U-shaped structures.
As mentioned, stripe noise primarily disrupts the image’s
horizontal gradient. DWT gives a clearer semantic in the
destriping task: accurately aggregates noise into low frequency
and horizontal gradient subbands. Therefore, Guan et al. [31]
first proposed a wavelet deep neural network for stripe noise
removal (SNRWDNN). This network was designed to directly
learn the mapping between wavelet subbands and utilize
IDWT to reconstruct the clean image. Inspired by MWCNN,
Chang et al. [34] presented a two-stream wavelet enhanced
U-Net (TSWEU) for stripe noise estimation. Most recently,
DSCGAN [36] introduced an unsupervised multilevel wavelet
structure as a destriping generator to capture the real sense
stripe distribution.
Despite the wavelet transforms providing CNNs with the
directional characteristics of stripe noise, the wavelet upsampler with a predetermined noise semantic distribution will
disrupt the semantic connectivity of the feature decoding.
Unlike previous wavelet U-shaped structures for destriping,
we use the PS as a semantic-bias-free upsampler for stable
image restoration.

Sa = λ a ⊗ S,

a ∈ {ll, lh, hl, hh}

(3)

where ⊗ represents the convolution operator with stride set to
2. Due to the dimensional mismatch between the filters λa and
the stripy feature S, broadcasting is applied in (3). Under this
computational approach, the HDWT differs from convolution
layers in two aspects.
1) Wavelet filters have constant parameters, allowing for
the incorporation of prior information in extracting the
directional features of stripe noise.
2) Each wavelet filter depth-wise calculates every channel
of S. In other words, HDWT only extracts spatial
features without semantic interaction.
Therefore, HDWT can aggregate stripe noise into the
low-frequency subband (Sll ) and horizontal gradient subband
(Shl ) in Fig. 1(c).
In multilevel wavelet CNNs, the four wavelet subbands are
next channel-wise concatenated to acquire fusion feature Sc ∈
R4C×H/2×W/2 , followed by a series of convolution layers f s (·)
to get the high-level feature Kc ∈ R4C×H/2×W/2
Sc = [Sll , Slh , Shl , Shh ]
Kc = f s (Sc )

(4)
(5)

where [·] is the channel-wise concatenation. Take note that the
weights of conventional convolution layers are learnable, and
the results of each step of spatial feature computation will be
summed along the channel dimensions to encapsulate crosssemantic information. Therefore, every channel of Kc is filled
with stripe noise in Fig. 1(d).

Authorized licensed use limited to: China Three Gorges University. Downloaded on March 20,2025 at 13:05:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YUAN et al.: ASCNet: ASYMMETRIC SAMPLING CORRECTION NETWORK FOR INFRARED IMAGE DESTRIPING

We next perform an inverse wavelet transform on the
high-level feature Kc for upsampling. First, Kc is split into
four equal branches as follows:
[K1 , K2 , K3 , K4 ] = Chunk4 (Kc )

(6)

where Chunk4 (·) denotes dividing the feature vector into
four equal parts along the channel dimension, Ki ∈
RC×H/2×W/2 (i ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4}) represent the four group of
divided features. When performing invert transform, Ki (i ∈
{1, 2, 3, 4}) can be renamed as four wavelet subbands Ka (a ∈
{ll, lh, hl, hh}), this operation is thus defined as follows:
K = 9(Kll , Klh , Khl , Khh )

(7)

where 9(·) refers to the invert HDWT (IHDWT) operator,
which samples each channel as shown in Fig. 1(d). Afterward,
four linear operations are applied to the wavelet subbands
using the inverse matrix in (2) to reconstruct each channel
feature, as described in [48]. Next, we reveal the shortcomings
of IHDWT for upsampling stripe features. First, employing
IHDWT means treating Ki (i ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4}) as the wavelet
subbands. However, the wavelet vertical gradient subband Klh
and diagonal subband Khh are contaminated. This contradicts
the original intention of DWT: leveraging the directional prior
of stripes, resulting in a cross-level column semantic gap
in Fig. 2(a). In contrast, PS directly reorganizes features
without linear calculation. Hence, it exhibits stronger column
coherence in Fig. 2(b).

B. Overall Network Architecture
The overall architecture of ASCNet is illustrated in Fig. 3.
It incorporates CNCM into an asymmetric U-shaped structure
to learn the residual mapping from I D to the clean image
IC . Specifically, given a degraded image I D ∈ R1×H ×W ,
ASCNet applies a convolution to I D to obtain low-level
feature F0 ∈ RC×H ×W . Then, F0 is further enhanced through
two consecutive convolution and LeakyReLU units to obtain
shallow feature F1 ∈ RC×H ×W . Subsequently, this shallow
feature is sequentially downsampled and feature-enhanced
by passing through three groups of RHDWT and CNCM
to achieve information encoding. Based on the analysis in
Section III-A, PSs are utilized as upsamplers in the decoding
stage. To capture low-level details and high-level semantics, long-skip connections are adopted to fuse encoded and
decoded features, and 3 × 3 convolutions are applied to
ensure decoded features have the same channel dimension
with encoded features. Subsequently, the 1 × 1 convolution is
performed to reduce channels of fused features by half. CNCM
is employed to enhance the fused features, which finely split
stripe noise and capture textural details. Finally, further two
consecutive convolution and LeakyReLU units are utilized to
enrich high-resolution features Fd . A 1 × 1 convolution and
Tanh activation are applied to Fd to generate the residual image
I N ∈ R1×H ×W , which is then added with the degraded image
I D ∈ R1×H ×W to obtain the restored image I O ∈ R1×H ×W .
We will discuss the effectiveness of PS in Section IV-D1.

5001815

C. Residual HDWT
The independent sampler often produces varying degrees
of semantic and structural information loss [23], [34]. Consequently, we propose an RHDWT. It integrates a model-driven
branch with a residual branch to address this issue. As shown
in Fig. 3(b), given an input feature Ii ∈ RC×H ×W , HDWT is
first utilized to decompose Ii into four subgraphs and concatenate them. Subsequently, 3 × 3 convolution and LeakyReLU
activation are employed to squeeze the concatenated subbands
ηC×H/2×W/2
to get the model-driven branch’s output Iout
,
model ∈ R
where η denotes the channel expansion factor. In the residual
branch, a 3 × 3 convolution with a step size two is used to
aggregate spatial and semantic features to get output Iout
res ∈
RηC×H/2×W/2 . Eventually, we add the outputs of two branches
to get the result I R ∈ RηC×H/2×W/2 as follows:
out
I R = Iout
model + Ires
δ
s=2
= f 3×3
([8(Ii )]) + f 3×3
(Ii )

(8)

δ
in which 8(·) denotes the HDWT operation, f 3×3
repres=2
sents 3 × 3 convolution and LeakyReLU activation, and f 3×3
is 3 × 3 convolution with step size set 2. We will discuss the
validity of RHDWT in Section IV-D2.

D. Column Nonuniformity Correction Module
The CNCM is depicted in Fig. 3(c), which nests the
RCSSC block into a densely connected residual (DCR) structure [49]. DCR can induce feature reusing and enhance
information flow [50]. Fig. 4(a) illustrates RCSSC, a structure
that integrates residual connections into the column spatial
self-correction (CSSC) block. The CSSC block comprises
three branches: the spatial attention branch (SAB), the column attention branch (CAB), and the self-calibrated branch
(SCB). Inspired by the effective self-calibrated dual attention
mechanism blocks for image deraining [42], given an input
feature X ∈ RC×H ×W , our CSSC process is defined as
Co = f 1×1 ([SAB(X), CAB(X)]) ⊙ SCB(X) + X
= f 1×1 ([SA, CA]) ⊙ SC + X

(9)

in which Co ∈ RC×H ×W is the output of CSSC, f 1×1
denotes 1 × 1 convolution, and ⊙ is the broadcasted Hadamard
product. SA, CA, and SC are the output of the module SAB,
CAB and SCB, respectively.
1) Spatial Attention Branch: SAB is employed to enhance
the spatial correlation [51]. As illustrated in Fig. 4(b), given
an input feature X ∈ RC×H ×W , global average and max
pooling along the channel dimension are applied to capture
the different semantic responses. Then, these responses are
concatenated and aggregated to acquire spatial weights, followed by multiplying with the input feature X to generate
output feature SA ∈ RC×H ×W . Mathematically
 Avg

s
Max
(X) ⊙ X
(10)
SA = f 3×3
f spatial (X), f spatial
s
where f 3×3
represents 3 × 3 convolution and sigmoid activaAvg
Max
tion, f spatial (·) and f spatial
(·) denotes the channel-wise average
and max pooling.

Authorized licensed use limited to: China Three Gorges University. Downloaded on March 20,2025 at 13:05:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5001815

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

Fig. 4. Architecture of the RCSSC block. (a) RCSSC incorporates residual connection into the CSSC block. The core modules of CSSC are (b) SAB that
utilizes spatial correlation to enhance structural characterization of key areas, (c) CAB that strengthens column characteristics to eliminate the stripe noise
column differences, and (d) SCB that build remote dependencies to fine-tune the global uniformity.

2) Column Attention Branch: Since the same amplifier is
shared by column pixels, features within the same column
should be assigned similar correction coefficients to emphasize
column dependencies. Considering global pooling can capture
richer high-level information [52], in Fig. 4, we apply the
Avg
Max
column average pooling f column (·) and max pooling f column
(·)
with pooling kernels size (H,1) to each column of the input
feature X ∈ RC×H ×W . Since the different pooling responses
correspond to the same columns, they are concatenated along
the channel dimension to capture this shared characteristic as
follows:
 Avg

Max
Mc = f column (X), f column
(X) .
(11)
The concatenated feature Mc ∈ R2C×1×W is shared to achieve
the information interacted and split into two equal branches
as follows:
Xa , Xm = Chunk2 (CBL(Mc ))

(12)

where Chunk2 (·) denotes channel-wise dividing the feature
vector into two equal parts, CBL(·) represents a set of Conv1 ×
1 + BN + LeakyReLU functions. Then, the attention models
are employed to obtain the column weights. The column
attention matrix CA ∈ RC×H ×W can be written as
Avg

Max
CA = X ⊙ Fcolumn (Xa ) ⊙ Fcolumn
(Xm )

(13)

Avg

Max
in which Fcolumn (·) and Fcolumn
(·) represent a series of Conv1 ×
1 + BN + ReLU + Conv1 × 1 + Sigmoid functions for
channel attention mechanisms [53].
3) Self-Calibrated Branch: As illustrated in Fig. 4(d), SCB
is utilized to achieve powerful contextual information modeling and establish long-range dependencies at each spatial
location [41]. Given an input feature X ∈ RC×H ×W , the
computation of the SCB can be described as follows:

SC = δs (X + B2 (conv(A2 (X))))

(14)

where B2 (·) denotes a bilinear interpolation (BI) amplified by
a factor of 2, and A2 (·) is an average pooling with filter size of

2 × 2 and step size of 2. After computing the self-calibrated
matrix SC ∈ RC×H ×W , we can calculate the output of CSSC
following (9).
E. Loss Function
Mean square error (mse) loss is adopted to impose supervision on the training process. The loss function for N image
pairs can be expressed as follows:
N

2
1 X i
L=
I O − IiC
N i=1

(15)

where IiC and IiO denote the ith ground truth (GT) and the ith
output of ASCNet, respectively.
IV. E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION
A. Experiment Settings
We compare ASCNet to ten state-of-the-art IR image
destriping methods, including four canonical traditional methods (GF [9], UTV [54], LRSID [43], and SEID [55]), and six
advanced deep learning-based methods (DMRN [23], DLSNUC [20], SNRWDNN [31], TSWEU [34], Restormer [56],
and DSCGAN [36]). To guarantee an equitable comparison,
the model-based methods use the default parameter provided
by the authors. For learning-based methods that lack weights,
we retrained them using the same datasets as our ASCNet and
following their original parameter settings.
1) Datasets: To cover a wide range of scenarios, the experimental data used in this work is composed of the following
three available IR datasets.
1) ICSRN [19]: Comprising 200 training images and 15 test
images about IR clouds with a resolution of 579 × 572.
Taking into account the similarity within this training
data, we selected 50 images from the ICSRN training set
for training purposes, and the entire test set was utilized
for testing.

Authorized licensed use limited to: China Three Gorges University. Downloaded on March 20,2025 at 13:05:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YUAN et al.: ASCNet: ASYMMETRIC SAMPLING CORRECTION NETWORK FOR INFRARED IMAGE DESTRIPING

5001815

TABLE I
AVERAGE PSNR AND SSIM OF VARIOUS D ESTRIPING M ETHODS ON T HREE T EST S ETS W ITH D IFFERENT T YPES OF S TRIPE N OISE . T HE B EST AND THE
S ECOND -B EST R ESULTS A RE H IGHLIGHTED IN B OLD AND U NDERLINED , R ESPECTIVELY

Fig. 5. Image destriping results of different methods on ICSRN with Gaussian-distributed simulated noises. Yellow arrows and circles represent the stripe
noise residue and blurred image details. (a) Degraded. (b) GF. (c) UTV. (d) LRSID. (e) SEID. (f) DMRN. (g) DLS-NUC. (h) SNRWDNN. (i) Restormer.
(j) DSCGAN. (k) ASCNet. (l) GT.

2) INFRARED [20]: He et al. [20] released 100 highquality 640 × 480 IR images containing rich daily life
scenes. As this dataset was not prepartitioned, we chose
the first 70 images to construct our training dataset and
reserved the remaining 30 for testing.
3) CVC09 [57]: Consisting of a large-scale sequence of
far IR (FIR) pedestrian images with a size of 640 ×
480 pixels. We selected 150 images showcasing diverse
scenes from the training set for training, and 30 images
from the test set were reserved for testing.

Therefore, the dataset used in this study consists of
270 training images and 75 testing images. Data augmentation
techniques are applied to the training data, including rotation,
scaling, and inversion [24], [58], [59]. We then crop these
augmented data using a sliding window with a patch size
of 64 × 64 and a step size of 40 × 40, generating 180 486
patches. The partitioned dataset and corresponding patch files
can be obtained from https://github.com/xdFai/ASCNet.
2) Noise Setting: Considering that random noise often
occurs together with stripe noise, we evaluated the proposed

Authorized licensed use limited to: China Three Gorges University. Downloaded on March 20,2025 at 13:05:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5001815

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

Fig. 6. Image destriping results of different methods on INFRARED with uniform-distributed simulated noises. Stripe residuals and blurred image details are
highlighted by yellow arrows and circles. (a) Degraded. (b) GF. (c) UTV. (d) LRSID. (e) SEID. (f) DMRN. (g) DLS-NUC. (h) SNRWDNN. (i) Restormer.
(j) DSCGAN. (k) ASCNet. (l) GT.

Fig. 7. Image destriping results of different methods on CVC09 with periodical-distributed simulated noises. Yellow arrows and circles represent the stripe
noise residue and blurred image details. (a) Degraded. (b) GF. (c) UTV. (d) LRSID. (e) SEID. (f) DMRN. (g) DLS-NUC. (h) SNRWDNN. (i) Restormer.
(j) DSCGAN. (k) ASCNet. (l) GT.

Fig. 8. Image destriping results of different methods on INFRARED with mixed simulated noises. Stripe residuals and blurred image details are labeled by
yellow arrows and circles. (a) Degraded. (b) GF. (c) UTV. (d) LRSID. (e) SEID. (f) DMRN. (g) DLS-NUC. (h) SNRWDNN. (i) Restormer. (j) DSCGAN.
(k) ASCNet. (l) GT.

model’s robustness using three typical distributions of stripe
noise (Gauss, uniform, and periodical) and one type of mixed
noise (random noise + stripe noise). Previous studies have
demonstrated the strong generalization ability of the cubic
degradation model [20], [24]. Therefore, we used cubic noise
for the three types of stripe noise training. Specifically, the
noise level of each order is set with a mean of 0, and
the randomized standard deviation ranges from 0 to 0.15.
We added random noise with a mean of 0 and a standard
deviation of 0.05 to the above stripe noise model for the mixed
noise.

3) Quantitative Metrics: Following prior IR image destriping works [15], [43], [60], we calculate the peak signal-tonoise ratio (PSNR) and structural similarity index measurement (SSIM) to evaluate the destriping performance. Higher
PSNR and SSIM values indicate a closer similarity between
the destriped and clean images.
4) Implementation Details: The basic width of ASCNet
is set to 32, and the channel expansion factor η in three
RHDWTs is set to 2, 2, and 1 separately. We will discuss
these hyperparameters in Section IV-E. The batch size and
epoch are set as 128 and 100, respectively. Our model was

Authorized licensed use limited to: China Three Gorges University. Downloaded on March 20,2025 at 13:05:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YUAN et al.: ASCNet: ASYMMETRIC SAMPLING CORRECTION NETWORK FOR INFRARED IMAGE DESTRIPING

5001815

Fig. 9. Exemplar stripy images and image destriping results of ASCNet. (a) Stripy image with different Gaussian-distributed noise levels. (b) Corresponding
destriping results of ASCNet.
TABLE II
ρ AND NIQE OF D IFFERENT D ESTRIPING M ETHODS ON R EAL S TRIPE N OISES , THE B EST AND THE S ECOND -B EST R ESULTS A RE H IGHLIGHTED IN B OLD
AND U NDERLINED

optimized using the Adam optimizer with an initial learning
rate of 0.001 and gradually decreased to 1 × 10−6 by the
cosine annealing strategy. The number of warm-up epochs is
set as 4. Meanwhile, we regularized the training by performing
the orthogonalization technique [61] and applied the standard
acceleration process to all wavelet transforms [62]. All experiments are conducted on a single Nvidia GeForce 3090 GPU,
an Intel Core i7-12 700KF CPU, and a 32 GB memory. The
training process took approximately 15 h.

the desk’s edge in Fig. 6, while the other methods introduce
artifacts and blurring. For the mixed noise shown in Fig. 8,
our result is arguably clearer than the GT.
3) Anti-Noise Experiment: Fig. 9 showcases the
visual results of ASCNet under various intensities of
Gaussian-distributed stripe noise. Even with high noise
intensity, ASCNet still exhibits excellent image restoration
capabilities.
C. Real Image Destriping

B. Simulated Image Destriping
1) Quantitative Results: We added the following four types
of noises to each test set for validation.
1) Gaussian: Gaussian-distributed stripe noise with noise
level σ ∈ [0, 0.10].
2) Uniform: Uniform-distributed stripe noise with noise
level µ ∈ [−0.10, 0.10].
3) Periodical: Randomly select a noise cycle period T ∈
{6, 7, 8, 9}, and add Gaussian-distributed stripe noise
with a noise level σ ∈ [0, 0.10] to period T .
4) Mixed: Based on the Gaussian, further add
Gaussian-distributed random noise with noise level
σ ∈ [0, 0.05].
The quantitative results are shown in Table I. The best and
second-best results are indicated in bold and underlined. It is
evident that our ASCNet outperforms the state-of-the-art methods. For the uniform-distributed stripe noise on INFRARED,
ASCNet achieves PSNR values that are 0.43 and 3.01 dB
higher than those of DSCGAN and Restormer, respectively.
2) Visual Performance: Qualitative destriping results are
shown in Figs. 5–8. Four sets of test images correspond to
Gaussian, uniform, periodical, and mixed noises. The effectiveness of ASCNet is apparent as it consistently delivers
remarkable outcomes across various stripe scenarios. Only
our method successfully recovers the image details around

To demonstrate the generalizability of ASCNet in varied
real-world scenarios, experiments are conducted including
30 different scenes captured by the Thales Minie-D long-wave
IR (LWIR) uncooled camera from the CVC09 dataset, FLIR
A65 LWIR detector from DLS-NUC, LWIR form MIRE and
our InSb mid-wave IR (MWIR) cooled camera. These images
contain rich and diverse stripe noise patterns.
1) Quantitative Metrics: Considering there are no reference
images for real stripe images, following previous works [9],
[16], we employ roughness index ρ and NIQE to quantitatively evaluate the performance of various destriping methods.
As presented in Table II, ASCNet demonstrates outstanding performance, securing the best result on NIQE and the
second-best on ρ, underscoring its superior human visual
perception.
2) Visual Results: Fig. 10 illustrates the visual effects in
three real-world scenes. We can observe that the proposed
method achieves optimal destriping results across various
real noise patterns. For example, only DMRN and ASCNet
effectively suppress the concentrated noise in “Road,” but
DMRN declines the localized contrast of the trees. For more
visual results see https://github.com/xdFai/ASCNet.
D. Ablation Study and Further Discussion
Table III first demonstrates the effectiveness of each module
in ASCNet. We can observe that the algorithm’s performance

Authorized licensed use limited to: China Three Gorges University. Downloaded on March 20,2025 at 13:05:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5001815

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

Fig. 10. Destriping results for three sets of real-world IR stripe images. Zoomed-in view to examine the details. (a) Degraded. (b) GF. (c) UTV. (d) LRSID.
(e) SEID. (f) DMRN. (g) DLS-NUC. (h) SNRWDNN. (i) TSWEU. (j) Restormer. (k) DSCGAN. (l) ASCNet.

Fig. 11. CMRCs of feature maps. (a)–(c) Denote three times upsampling for feature decoding. (d) Showcases the CMRCs of the restored image and ground
truth. (e) Visual result and the PSNR value. Red boxes highlight the column semantic gap caused by symmetric sampling.

progressively improves with the inclusion of the proposed
structures. Fig. 11 further visualizes the effectiveness of PS
and RHDWT for column modulation of stripe noises. Next,
we proceed with an in-depth analysis of ASCNet from three
distinct perspectives.

1) Asymmetric Sampling: Based on ASCNet, Table IV
shows the quantitative results for the six symmetric samplers, including four typical DWTs: Haar, Daubechies2 (Db2),
Biorthogonal1.5 (Bior1.5), and Symlets5 (Sym5), as well as
SC/transpose convolution (TC) and pixel unshuffle (PUS)/PS.

Authorized licensed use limited to: China Three Gorges University. Downloaded on March 20,2025 at 13:05:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YUAN et al.: ASCNet: ASYMMETRIC SAMPLING CORRECTION NETWORK FOR INFRARED IMAGE DESTRIPING

5001815

TABLE III

TABLE VI

BASED ON U-N ET, A BLATION S TUDY OF THE WAVELET S AMPLER (WS),
DCR, AS, RHDWT, AND RCSSC M ODULE IN AVERAGE PSNR/SSIM
ON T HREE T EST S ETS W ITH G AUSSIAN N OISE L EVEL σ ∈ [0, 0.10]

AVERAGE PSNR AND SSIM ACHIEVED B YVARIANTS OF RHDWT ON
T HREE T EST S ETS W ITH G AUSSIAN N OISE L EVEL σ ∈ [0, 0.10]

TABLE IV
AVERAGE PSNR/SSIM OF THE VARIOUS S YMMETRIC S AMPLING S TRUC TURES ON T HREE T YPES OF S TRIPE N OISE

TABLE V
AVERAGE PSNR AND SSIM OF AS ON INFRARED AND ICSRN W ITH
G AUSSIAN N OISE L EVEL σ ∈ [0, 0.10]
Fig. 12. Different structures of the column attention mechanism. “EXP”
means expanding the feature size to match the input tensor, “CBL” represents
a set of Conv1 × 1 + BN + LeakyReLU functions, and “EXC” denotes the
excitation module of the attention mechanism. (a) CCM [39]: traditional module in CSCNet. (b) CAB_v1: based on CCM, introduces dual-column-pooling.
(c) CAB_v2: based on CAB_v1, introduces column-weight. (d) CAB: based
on CAB_v2, introduces dual-correction.

To ensure a fair comparison, we maintain the same parameters and computational complexity budget for all models.
It can be seen that the performance of wavelet transforms
is generally superior to other structures. This is attributed to
DWT’s ability to aggregate noise features into distinct semantic patterns, facilitating effective neural network learning.
We also observe that the Haar wavelet performs slightly better
than other wavelets. This is because the signal responses of
adjacent columns in IR FPA are independently and identically
distributed, making the simple Haar wavelet better at highlighting the gradient changes of noise. Subsequently, we use
the HDWT as the downsampler and investigate the optimal
upsampling structures, including Inverse HDWT (IHDWT),
BI, nearest interpolation (NI), TC, and PS. As shown in
Table V, PS obtains the highest PSNR and SSIM values. This
is because PS directly reconstructs the high-resolution feature
based on the four neighboring semantic rearrangements with
less semantic bias.
2) Residual HDWT: To validate the effectiveness of
double-branch sampling and explore the location of residual
branch embedding, we built three structure variants: RHDWT
with only model-driven branch (RHDWT w M), RHDWT with
only residual branch (RHDWT w R), RHDWT with embedding residual branch into model-driven branch immediately
after wavelet subband concatenate (RHDWT w I), respectively.

TABLE VII
AVERAGE PSNR AND SSIM OF THE C OMBINATIONS OF D IFFERENT
B RANCHES U NDER THE CSSC A RCHITECTURE ON T HREE T EST S ETS
W ITH G AUSSIAN N OISE σ ∈ [0, 0.10], THE S ECOND TO F IFTH ROWS
R EPRESENT D IFFERENT C OLUMN C ALIBRATION B RANCHES ,
THE S IXTH AND S EVENTH ROWS D ENOTE THE S PATIAL
ATTENTION AND SCB S , R ESPECTIVELY

The quantitative results are exhibited in Table VI. Comparing
RHDWT w M and RHDWT w R, despite RHDWT w M
consuming more parameters and computational complexity,
it effectively improves PSNR and SSIM values by combining
the directional prior to the stripe noise. Our RHDWT achieves
the best results with acceptable parameters. This illustrates that

Authorized licensed use limited to: China Three Gorges University. Downloaded on March 20,2025 at 13:05:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5001815

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

Fig. 13. Qualitative destriping combinations of CABs on INFRARED with
Gaussian noise σ ∈ [0, 0.10]. Stripe residuals and blurred image details are
highlighted by yellow arrows and circles. (a) Degraded. (b) K1. (c) K2. (d) K3.
(e) K4. (f) K5. (g) CSSC. (h) GT.

TABLE VIII

Fig. 14. (a) Relationship among run time (ms) and PSNR. (b) Relationship
between the number of parameters (M) and PSNR.
TABLE IX
D ETECTION R ESULTS ON R EAL S TRIPE I MAGES AND I MAGES
P ROCESSED BY ASCN ET IN AVERAGE Pd (%), Fa (10−6 ),
IoU(%), AND F -M EASURE(%)

H YPERPARAMETER S TUDY OF THE M ODEL IN AVERAGE PSNR AND SSIM
ON T HREE T EST S ETS W ITH G AUSSIAN N OISES L EVEL σ ∈ [0, 0.10]

E. Hyperparameter Analysis and the Efficiency of ASCNet

paralleling stripe-directional prior knowledge with data-driven
aggregating semantics can enhance the effectiveness of features.
3) Column Spatial Self-Correction: As shown in Fig. 12,
we showcase three different CABs to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed CSSC. Table VII shows the results
of various column branches combined with spatial and
self-calibration branches (K 1–K 5 and CSSC) based on our
ASCNet.
1) K1, K2, and CSSC: It demonstrates that both
self-calibration and SABs are essential. Without using
the spatial attention or self-calibration branch, the PSNR
will decrease by 0.83 and 0.34 dB, respectively.
2) K3 and K4: Despite a larger model size of 0.058 M,
by utilizing the dual-column-pooling, CAB_v1 achieved
0.30 dB higher PSNR and 0.0009 higher SSIM than
CCM.
3) K4, K5, and CSSC: Using column-weigh and dualcorrection strategies, CSSC improves the value of PSNR
by 0.03 and 0.19 dB without parameters increasing.
We further compare the visual performance of different
combinations of CABs in Fig. 13. The results demonstrate
that the strategies employed in CSSC exhibit more successful
stripe noise reduction.

Since ASCNet performs many computations in the RCSSC
to obtain remote fine-grained contextual information, the channel expansion factor η of the third RHDWT, here named
η3 , is set as 1 to mitigate the parameters burden. In this
section, we validate the hyperparameters of ASCNet from η
and the base width of the mode W . As shown in Table VIII,
the structure with η3 = 2 has similar performance as η3 =
1 but brings larger parameters and computational complexity,
so ASCNet sets η3 to 1. We also observe that mse loss obtains
better results than mean absolute error (MAE) loss. In addition,
the number of parameters and flops, as well as the destriping
performance, show significant improvement as the base width
of the model gradually changes from 8 to 32. However, the
model with W = 48 quadruples the number of parameters
with little performance gain. Therefore, we set the basic width
of ASCNet as 32 and defined ASCNet with W = 18 and
W = 6 as ASCNet-small and ASCNet-tiny. Model efficiency is
shown in Fig. 14, GF, UTV, LRSID, DMRN, DLS-NUC, and
TSWEU ran on the MATLAB 2020b platform, SNRWDNN
ran on the TensorFlow 2.2.0 framework, Restormer, DSCGAN,
and ASCNet conduct on Pytorhc 1.7.1. Our ASCNet and
its variants have an acceptable running speed and optimal
performance.
F. Task-Driven Evaluate: IRSTD
Taking into account that destriping can be treated as a
preprocessing for subsequent applications, we showcase ASCNet’s efficacy in the IRSTD task. First, we conduct 100 IR
images containing three aircrafts with stripe noises acquired
by long-wave uncooled cameras. Three SOTA learning-based
IRSTD methods, ACM [63], RDIAN [64], and DNA-Net [65],
are selected to evaluate the advantage that ASCNet brings

Authorized licensed use limited to: China Three Gorges University. Downloaded on March 20,2025 at 13:05:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YUAN et al.: ASCNet: ASYMMETRIC SAMPLING CORRECTION NETWORK FOR INFRARED IMAGE DESTRIPING

Fig. 15. (a) IRSTD results on simulated mixed noise. (b) IRSTD results on
real stripe noise mixed with simulated Gaussian noise. Yellow boxes and red
circles represent correctly detected targets and miss detection, respectively.

to the IRSTD task. In Table IX, probability of detection
(Pd ), false-alarm rate (Fa ), intersection over union (IoU), and
F-measure are utilized to evaluate the detection result [3].
It can be seen that the performance of all three detectors is
improved after our ASCNet processing. Fig. 15 shows the two
scenes’ visual effects of stripe removal and target detection.
The targets in the degraded images exhibit a low signal-tonoise ratio (SNR) (with the neighborhood set to 10) and
are contaminated by stripe and random noise. Our ASCNet
effectively restores the target and its local region, enhancing
the SNR of most targets. Consequently, many previously
missed targets are successfully detected, and the outlines of the
targets are more accurately delineated. These results indicate
the effectiveness of ASCNet on IRSTD.
V. C ONCLUSION
In this article, we propose a novel ASCNet for IR image
destriping. Based on the observation of semantic crosstalk
with stripe noise, we introduce PS as an upsampler to prevent
excessive decoding of a priori features and promote cross-level
semantic articulation. We also propose the RHDWT as a
downsampler to incorporate stripe-directional prior knowledge
and data-driven semantic interaction, enhancing the presentation of image features. Moreover, a CNCM is designed to
enhance remote dependence of column characteristics in the
global context. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the
proposed method performs well against the state-of-the-art
methods in both synthetic and real settings. We also confirm
its effectiveness in enhancing the precision of the downstream
IRSTD task.
R EFERENCES
[1] R. Kou et al., “MCGC: A multiscale chain growth clustering
algorithm for generating infrared small target mask under singlepoint supervision,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024,
Art. no. 5620412.

5001815

[2] T. Wu et al., “MTU-Net: Multilevel TransUnet for space-based infrared
tiny ship detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023,
Art. no. 5601015.
[3] S. Yuan, H. Qin, X. Yan, N. Akhtar, and A. Mian, “SCTransNet: Spatialchannel cross transformer network for infrared small target detection,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5002615.
[4] L. Song and H. Huang, “Fixed pattern noise removal based on a semicalibration method,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45,
no. 10, pp. 11842–11855, Oct. 2023.
[5] X. Wu, D. Hong, and J. Chanussot, “UIU- for infrared small object
detection,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 32, pp. 364–376, 2023.
[6] M. Schulz and L. Caldwell, “Nonuniformity correction and correctability
of infrared focal plane arrays,” Infr. Phys. Technol., vol. 36, no. 4,
pp. 763–777, Jun. 1995.
[7] X. Zhou, Y. Zhang, J. Liu, and Y. Hu, “A novel two-stage destriping
algorithm based on MWIR energy separation and image guidance (MESIG),” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5001316.
[8] J. Zhang et al., “A combined stripe noise removal and deblurring
recovering method for thermal infrared remote sensing images,” IEEE
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5003214.
[9] Y. Cao, M. Y. Yang, and C.-L. Tisse, “Effective strip noise removal
for low-textured infrared images based on 1-D guided filtering,” IEEE
Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 26, no. 12, pp. 2176–2188,
Dec. 2016.
[10] Q. Zeng, H. Qin, X. Yan, and T. Yang, “Fourier domain anomaly
detection and spectral fusion for stripe noise removal of TIR imagery,”
Remote Sens., vol. 12, no. 22, p. 3714, Nov. 2020.
[11] Q. Zeng, H. Qin, X. Yan, and H. Zhou, “Fourier spectrum guidance for
stripe noise removal in thermal infrared imagery,” IEEE Geosci. Remote
Sens. Lett., vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 1072–1076, Jun. 2020.
[12] Y. Tendero, S. Landeau, and J. Gilles, “Non-uniformity correction of
infrared images by midway equalization,” Image Process. Line, vol. 2,
pp. 134–146, Jul. 2012.
[13] M. Wegener, “Destriping multiple sensor imagery by improved histogram matching,” Int. J. Remote Sens., vol. 11, no. 5, pp. 859–875,
May 1990.
[14] B. K. P. Horn and R. J. Woodham, “Destriping Landsat MSS images
by histogram modification,” Comput. Graph. Image Process., vol. 10,
no. 1, pp. 69–83, May 1979.
[15] Y. He, C. Zhang, B. Zhang, and Z. Chen, “FSPnP: Plug-and-play
frequency–spatial-domain hybrid denoiser for thermal infrared image,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5000416.
[16] J. Zhao et al., “Single image stripe nonuniformity correction with
gradient-constrained optimization model for infrared focal plane arrays,”
Opt. Commun., vol. 296, pp. 47–52, Jun. 2013.
[17] N. Li, B. Wang, F. Goudail, Y. Zhao, and Q. Pan, “Joint denoisingdemosaicking network for long-wave infrared division-of-focal-plane
polarization images with mixed noise level estimation,” IEEE Trans.
Image Process., vol. 32, pp. 5961–5976, 2023.
[18] X. Kuang, X. Sui, Q. Chen, and G. Gu, “Single infrared image stripe
noise removal using deep convolutional networks,” IEEE Photon. J.,
vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 1–13, Aug. 2017.
[19] P. Xiao, Y. Guo, and P. Zhuang, “Removing stripe noise from infrared
cloud images via deep convolutional networks,” IEEE Photon. J., vol. 10,
no. 4, pp. 1–14, Aug. 2018.
[20] Z. He, Y. Cao, Y. Dong, J. Yang, Y. Cao, and C.-L. Tisse, “Singleimage-based nonuniformity correction of uncooled long-wave infrared
detectors: A deep-learning approach,” Appl. Opt., vol. 57, no. 18,
p. D155, 2018.
[21] T. Li, Y. Zhao, Y. Li, and G. Zhou, “Non-uniformity correction of
infrared images based on improved CNN with long-short connections,”
IEEE Photon. J., vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 1–13, Jun. 2021.
[22] J. Lee and Y. M. Ro, “Dual-branch structured de-striping convolution network using parametric noise model,” IEEE Access, vol. 8,
pp. 155519–155528, 2020.
[23] Y. Chang, L. Yan, L. Liu, H. Fang, and S. Zhong, “Infrared aerothermal
nonuniform correction via deep multiscale residual network,” IEEE
Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 16, no. 7, pp. 1120–1124, Jul. 2019.
[24] K. Xu, Y. Zhao, F. Li, and W. Xiang, “Single infrared image stripe
removal via deep multi-scale dense connection convolutional neural
network,” Infr. Phys. Technol., vol. 121, Mar. 2022, Art. no. 104008.
[25] Y. Dong, B. Zhao, J. Yang, Y. Cao, and Y. Cao, “Two-stage convolutional
neural network for joint removal of sensor noise and background
interference in lock-in thermography,” NDT & E Int., vol. 137, Jul. 2023,
Art. no. 102816.

Authorized licensed use limited to: China Three Gorges University. Downloaded on March 20,2025 at 13:05:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5001815

[26] D. Ding, Y. Li, P. Zhao, K. Li, S. Jiang, and Y. Liu, “Single infrared
image stripe removal via residual attention network,” Sensors, vol. 22,
no. 22, p. 8734, Nov. 2022.
[27] X. Hu, S. Luo, C. He, W. Wu, and H. Wu, “Infrared thermal image
denoising with symmetric multi-scale sampling network,” Infr. Phys.
Technol., vol. 134, Nov. 2023, Art. no. 104909.
[28] Z. Xiao, H. Qin, S. Yang, X. Yan, and H. Zhou, “Spatial–spectral
oriented triple attention network for hyperspectral image denoising,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5503717.
[29] J. Guan, R. Lai, A. Xiong, Z. Liu, and L. Gu, “Fixed pattern noise
reduction for infrared images based on cascade residual attention CNN,”
Neurocomputing, vol. 377, pp. 301–313, Feb. 2020.
[30] T. Wang, Q. Yin, F. Cao, M. Li, Z. Lin, and W. An, “Noise parameter
estimation two-stage network for single infrared dim small target image
destriping,” Remote Sens., vol. 14, no. 19, p. 5056, Oct. 2022.
[31] J. Guan, R. Lai, and A. Xiong, “Wavelet deep neural network for stripe
noise removal,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 44544–44554, 2019.
[32] E. Wang, P. Jiang, X. Hou, Y. Zhu, and L. Peng, “Infrared stripe correction algorithm based on wavelet analysis and gradient equalization,”
Appl. Sci., vol. 9, no. 10, p. 1993, May 2019.
[33] E. Wang, P. Jiang, X. Li, and H. Cao, “Infrared stripe correction
algorithm based on wavelet decomposition and total variation-guided
filtering,” J. Eur. Opt. Soc.-Rapid Publications, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 1–12,
Dec. 2020.
[34] Y. Chang, M. Chen, L. Yan, X.-L. Zhao, Y. Li, and S. Zhong, “Toward
universal stripe removal via wavelet-based deep convolutional neural network,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 2880–2897,
Apr. 2020.
[35] S. Zhang, X. Sui, Z. Yao, G. Gu, and Q. Chen, “Research on nonuniformity correction based on deep learning,” Proc. SPIE, vol. 12061,
pp. 97–102, Jan. 2021.
[36] S. Yang, H. Qin, S. Yuan, X. Yan, and H. Rahmani, “DestripeCycleGAN:
Stripe simulation CycleGAN for unsupervised infrared image destriping,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 73, pp. 1–14, 2024.
[37] M. Li, S. Nong, T. Nie, C. Han, and L. Huang, “An infrared stripe noise
removal method based on multi-scale wavelet transform and multinomial
sparse representation,” Comput. Intell. Neurosci., vol. 2022, pp. 1–18,
May 2022.
[38] Y. Duan et al., “LCIRE-net: Lightweight cross-modal information interaction for road feature extraction from remote sensing images and GPS
trajectory/LiDAR,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 63, 2025,
Art. no. 2000418.
[39] J. Li, D. Zeng, J. Zhang, J. Han, and T. Mei, “Column-spatial correction
network for remote sensing image destriping,” Remote Sens., vol. 14,
no. 14, p. 3376, Jul. 2022.
[40] W. Shi et al., “Real-time single image and video super-resolution using
an efficient sub-pixel convolutional neural network,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 1874–1883.
[41] J.-J. Liu, Q. Hou, M.-M. Cheng, C. Wang, and J. Feng, “Improving convolutional networks with self-calibrated convolutions,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020,
pp. 10096–10105.
[42] Z. Hao, S. Gai, and P. Li, “Multi-scale self-calibrated dual-attention
lightweight residual dense deraining network based on monogenic
wavelets,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 33, no. 6,
pp. 2642–2655, Dec. 2022.
[43] Y. Chang, L. Yan, T. Wu, and S. Zhong, “Remote sensing image stripe
noise removal: From image decomposition perspective,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 54, no. 12, pp. 7018–7031, Dec. 2016.
[44] M. Li, S. Nong, T. Nie, C. Han, L. Huang, and L. Qu, “A novel
stripe noise removal model for infrared images,” Sensors, vol. 22, no. 8,
p. 2971, Apr. 2022.
[45] Z. Xiao, H. Qin, S. Yang, X. Yan, and H. Zhou, “Multiscale-sparse
spatial–spectral transformer for hyperspectral image denoising,” IEEE
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5526819.
[46] Y. Yang et al., “Dual wavelet attention networks for image classification,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 33, no. 4,
pp. 1899–1910, Apr. 2023.
[47] K. Wu, L. Zhu, W. Shi, W. Wang, and J. Wu, “Self-attention
memory-augmented wavelet-CNN for anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans.
Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 1374–1385, Mar. 2022.
[48] P. Liu, H. Zhang, W. Lian, and W. Zuo, “Multi-level wavelet convolutional neural networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 74973–74985, 2019.
[49] B. Park, S. Yu, and J. Jeong, “Densely connected hierarchical network
for image denoising,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. Workshops (CVPRW), Jun. 2019, pp. 2104–2113.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

[50] W. Liu, Q. Yan, and Y. Zhao, “Densely self-guided wavelet network
for image denoising,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. Workshops (CVPRW), Jun. 2020, pp. 432–433.
[51] S. Woo, J. Park, J.-Y. Lee, and I. S. Kweon, “CBAM: Convolutional
block attention module,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., Sep. 2018,
pp. 3–19.
[52] Q. Hou, D. Zhou, and J. Feng, “Coordinate attention for efficient
mobile network design,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021, pp. 13713–13722.
[53] J. Hu, L. Shen, and G. Sun, “Squeeze-and-excitation networks,” in Proc.
IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jul. 2018, pp. 7132–7141.
[54] M. Bouali and S. Ladjal, “Toward optimal destriping of MODIS data
using a unidirectional variational model,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
Sens., vol. 49, no. 8, pp. 2924–2935, Aug. 2011.
[55] L. Song and H. Huang, “Simultaneous destriping and image denoising
using a nonparametric model with the EM algorithm,” IEEE Trans.
Image Process., vol. 32, pp. 1065–1077, 2023.
[56] S. W. Zamir, A. Arora, S. Khan, M. Hayat, F. S. Khan, and M.-H. Yang,
“Restormer: Efficient transformer for high-resolution image restoration,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
Jun. 2022, pp. 5728–5739.
[57] Y. Socarrás, S. Ramos, D. Vázquez, A. M. López, and T. Gevers,
“Adapting pedestrian detection from synthetic to far infrared images,”
in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. Workshops (ICCVW), vol. 3,
Oct. 2013, pp. 1–3.
[58] Y. Duan, J. Qu, L. Zhang, X. Qu, and D. Yang, “LGRF-Net: A novel
hybrid attention network for lightweight global road feature extraction,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5650315.
[59] R. Kou, C. Wang, Q. Fu, Y. Yu, and D. Zhang, “Infrared small target
detection based on the improved density peak global search and human
visual local contrast mechanism,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth
Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 15, pp. 6144–6157, 2022.
[60] X. Kuang, X. Sui, Y. Liu, C. Liu, Q. Chen, and G. Gu, “Robust destriping
method based on data-driven learning,” Infr. Phys. Technol., vol. 94,
pp. 142–150, Nov. 2018.
[61] K. Zhang, W. Zuo, and L. Zhang, “FFDNet: Toward a fast and flexible
solution for CNN-based image denoising,” IEEE Trans. Image Process.,
vol. 27, no. 9, pp. 4608–4622, Sep. 2018.
[62] F. Cotter, “Uses of complex wavelets in deep convolutional neural
networks,” Ph.D. dissertation, School Technol., Dept. Eng., Univ. Cambridge, Cambridge, U.K., 2020.
[63] Y. Dai, Y. Wu, F. Zhou, and K. Barnard, “Asymmetric contextual
modulation for infrared small target detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis., Oct. 2021, pp. 950–959.
[64] H. Sun, J. Bai, F. Yang, and X. Bai, “Receptive-field and direction
induced attention network for infrared dim small target detection with a
large-scale dataset IRDST,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61,
2023, Art. no. 5000513.
[65] B. Li et al., “Dense nested attention network for infrared small target
detection,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 32, pp. 1745–1758, 2022.

Shuai Yuan received the B.S. degree from Xi’an
Technological University, Xi’an, China, in 2019.
He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with
Xidian University, Xi’an.
He is currently studying with The University of
Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, Australia, as a Visiting
Student, working closely with Dr. Naveed Akhtar.
His research interests include infrared image understanding, remote sensing, and deep learning.

Hanlin Qin (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. and
Ph.D. degrees from Xidian University, Xi’an, China,
in 2004 and 2010, respectively.
He is currently a Full Professor with the School
of Optoelectronic Engineering, Xidian University.
He has authored or co-authored more than 100 scientific articles. His research interests include target
detection, human–computer interaction, and photonic chips.

Authorized licensed use limited to: China Three Gorges University. Downloaded on March 20,2025 at 13:05:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YUAN et al.: ASCNet: ASYMMETRIC SAMPLING CORRECTION NETWORK FOR INFRARED IMAGE DESTRIPING

Xiang Yan (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. and
Ph.D. degrees from Xidian University, Xi’an, China,
in 2012 and 2018, respectively.
He was a Visiting Ph.D. Student with the School of
Computer Science and Software Engineering, Perth,
WA, Australia, from 2016 to 2018, working closely
with Prof. Ajmal Mian. He is currently an Associate
Professor with Xidian University. His research interests include image processing, computer vision, and
deep learning.

Shiqi Yang received the B.S. degree in electronic
science and technology from Xidian University,
Xi’an, Shanxi, China, in 2022, where he is currently
pursuing the M.S. degree.
His research interests include deep learning, image
destriping, and infrared small target detection.

Shuowen Yang received the B.S. degree in electronic science and technology and the Ph.D. degree
in physical electronics from Xidian University,
Xi’an, China, in 2016 and 2023, respectively.
During the Ph.D. degree, he studied at the University of Granada, Granada, Spain, from 2021 to 2022,
working closely with Prof. Rafael Molina.

5001815

Naveed Akhtar (Member, IEEE) received the master’s degree from Hochschule Bonn-Rhein-Sieg,
Sankt Augustin, Germany, in 2012, and the Ph.D.
degree in computer science from the University of
Western Australia, Perth, WA, Australia, in 2016.
He is a Senior Lecturer with The University of
Melbourne.
Dr. Akhtar was a recipient of the Discovery Early
Career Researcher Award from Australian Research
Council. He is a Universal Scientific Education
and Research Network Laureate in formal sciences.
He was a recipient of the Google Research Scholar Program Award in 2023.
He was a Finalist of Western Australia’s Early Career Scientist of the Year
2021. He has served as an ACM Distinguished Speaker from 2021 to 2024.
He served as the Area Chair for reputed conferences like IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) and European Conference
on Computer Vision (ECCV) on multiple occasions. He serves as an Associate
Editor for IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON N EURAL N ETWORKS AND L EARNING
S YSTEMS.

Huixin Zhou (Member, IEEE) received the B.S.,
M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in optical engineering from
Xidian University, Xi’an, China, in 1996, 2002, and
2004, respectively.
He is currently the Vice-Dean and a Professor
with the School of Physics, Xidian University. His
research interests include remote sensing image
processing, photoelectric imaging, real-time image
processing, and target detection and tracking.
Dr. Zhou is a Standing Member of the Optoelectronic Technology Professional Committee of
Chinese Society of Astronautics, a Senior Member of Chinese Optical Society,
and a member of the Optical Society of America and Shaanxi Provincial
Physical Society. He is an Associate Editor of the journal of Infrared Physics
and Technology.

Authorized licensed use limited to: China Three Gorges University. Downloaded on March 20,2025 at 13:05:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

