IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

4402713

An Adaptive Dual-Supervised Cross-Deep
Dependency Network for Pixel-Wise Classification
Wenping Ma , Senior Member, IEEE, Chuang Chen , Mengru Ma , Hekai Zhang , Hao Zhu , Member, IEEE,
and Licheng Jiao , Fellow, IEEE
Abstract— With the advancement of remote sensing (RS)
technology and satellite observation, the task of fusing multisource data, such as multispectral (MS) and panchromatic
(PAN) images, has become increasingly important. However,
image fusion involving certain semantic differences can hinder the
model’s ability to learn effective feature mappings. To reconstruct
richer and more consistent features during fusion, we propose
an adaptive dual-supervised cross-deep dependency network
(ADCD-Net), which consists of two training stages. Stage I
uses a semantic perceptual self-supervision strategy (SPS) to
learn deep features across different modalities, thereby reducing
semantic differences while mining its own non-singular features.
Stage II uses the deep temporal Mamba module (DTM-Module)
to interactively learn the output of each network layers, which
are able to take part in the deep feature reinforcement and
improve the classification performance of semantic information.
Finally, to eliminate channel redundancy during the two-stage
network training process while enhancing spatial location memory and feature discrimination in the 2-D features, we propose
a deformable interactive attention module (DIA-Module) to
further bolster feature representation capabilities. Additionally,
we conduct comparative and transfer experiments on multiple RS
datasets, achieving outstanding classification results. Our code is
available at https://github.com/ChenC1027/ADCD-Net.
Index Terms— Deformable attention, fusion classification,
Mamba, remote sensing (RS), self-supervision.

I. I NTRODUCTION

R

EMOTE sensing (RS) images capture information about
the Earth’s surface through satellites or aerial platforms,
serving as a valuable data source for numerous image processing tasks, including object recognition and environmental
monitoring. Among these tasks, RS image fusion classification
is a critical data analysis process that employs image processing technology to categorize pixels into distinct object classes.
This classification provides precise spatial information support
for various applications and plays a significant role in multiple
Received 2 September 2024; revised 6 December 2024; accepted 11 January
2025. Date of publication 15 January 2025; date of current version 3 February
2025. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62276199, Grant 62276200, Grant 62036006, and
Grant 62171347; in part by the Joint Funds of the National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grant U22B2054; in part by the Key Scientific
Technological Innovation Research Project of the Ministry of Education;
in part by China Postdoctoral Science Foundation Funded Project under
Grant 2019M663634; and in part by China Postdoctoral Science Foundation
Special Funded Project under Grant 2020T130492. (Corresponding author:
Mengru Ma.)
The authors are with the Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and
Image Understanding of Ministry of Education, International Research Center
for Intelligent Perception and Computation, School of Artificial Intelligence,
Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China (e-mail: mengrumalearn@163.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TGRS.2025.3529749

fields, such as environmental monitoring [1], [2], agricultural
management [3], [4], and urban planning [5], [6].
According to the various acquisition bands, RS images
can be divided into multispectral (MS) images, panchromatic
(PAN) images, hyperspectral images (HSIs), thermal infrared
images, and radar images, which have different advantages.
The optimization of their features and effective fusion holds
significant practical importance for classification tasks. This
article examines the impact of feature interaction between MS
and PAN images on the results of fusion classification.
In recent years, the popularization of deep learning methods
has led to significant advancements in multisource RS image
processing algorithms. These algorithms can primarily be
categorized into deep learning frameworks based on convolutional neural networks (CNNs), Transformers, and generative
adversarial networks (GANs).
CNNs retain the spatial structure information of images
through convolution operations [7], [8], [9], [10], [11], [12],
[13], [14], [15]. Additionally, the parameter-sharing mechanism enhances training efficiency and enables effective
processing of high-resolution RS images. Masi et al. [16]
were the first to apply CNNs to the pansharpening task,
achieving significant advancements. Hong et al. [17] designed
a novel decoupled-and-coupled network (DC-Net) to transform
HS-MS information to the subpixel level and achieved an
effective multimodal fusion. However, standard CNNs are
sensitive to variations in image position and rotation, relying
heavily on data augmentation and specific network architectures to enhance performance.
Transformers [18] adaptively focus on the important components of the input sequence through a self-attention
mechanism, which proves effective when processing serialized
image data [19], [20], [21], [22]. Meng et al. [23] obtained rich
fusion features by using Vits [24] to establish long-distance
dependencies in RS images across different modalities, achieving long-distance capture of contextual dependencies between
local image features. Ma et al. [25] designed a cross-source
interaction strategy based on self-attention to minimize
semantic differences among various modal information, thus
enhancing the effectiveness of fusion classification. However,
the computational complexity of the self-attention mechanism
remains high, and it still presents certain limitations in tasks
involving longer sequences.
GANs [26] can use CNNs or Transformers as the design
components of the generator and discriminator, rely on the
adversarial game between these two to estimate the probability
distribution of the target, thereby implicitly completing feature

1558-0644 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: China Three Gorges University. Downloaded on March 25,2025 at 10:52:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4402713

extraction, feature fusion, and image reconstruction [27], [28],
[29], [30], [31], [32]. Ma et al. [33] established an effective adversarial game to force the fusion of visible light
and thermal radiation textures, resulting in rich details in
infrared images. Ma et al. [34] used GANs to reformulate
image fusion as a multidistribution simultaneous estimation
problem, thereby achieving a balance in multimodal fusion.
However, unsupervised adversarial learning methods may lead
to unstable feature generation and mode collapse. Furthermore,
the hyperparameter tuning and network design during the
experimental process are extremely rigorous.
Although deep learning methods have significantly
advanced the field of RS image feature interaction and fusion,
challenges remain in fusion classification tasks.
1) Fusion classification tasks primarily depend on only
supervised labeled training samples to calculate the loss.
When the training samples exhibit modality differences
or are inherently challenging, the model may struggle
to effectively learn during the semantic information
extraction and fusion process, resulting in the loss of
important common information. Consequently, the upper
limit of accuracy for the classification task is often
diminished.
2) Current algorithms typically focus on interactions
between features of different modalities but often overlook interactions between features at various levels
within a single modality. As a result, the guiding
significance of shallow non-semantic information on
classification results is frequently neglected, which can
diminish the model’s robustness and classification performance across diverse scenarios.
3) The spatial attention module often compresses channel
information using maximum pooling to generate edge
position information. However, this process introduces
a bias toward specific modal information, which fails
to adequately understand and capture the diversity of
targets. Consequently, this results in an insufficient representation of spatial information in the mask and the
omission of certain valuable features that are challenging
to capture but deserving of attention.
In order to effectively reduce the impact of the above
problems on classification performance, we have made the
following innovations.
1) In order to enhance the common features of different
modalities in the fusion classification task and reduce
the differences in semantic information, we propose a
two-stage adaptive dual-supervised cross-deep dependency network (ADCD-Net). By generating similarity
semantic perceptual features in stage I that completely
uses self-supervised loss, we can reconstruct deep
semantic features for the supervised task. This approach
reduces the distortion of deep fusion features while
alleviating the reliance on real samples for parameter
updates during training.
2) Aiming to capture the long-range dependencies between
feature maps of different layers and enable the shallow features of the network to help optimize the deep

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

semantic information, we propose the deep temporal Mamba module (DTM-Module). By constructing
a selective state space model (SSM) that maps the
global dependencies of features across different levels
and scales, we facilitate information transfer and feature
reuse, thereby enabling the model to comprehend image
content more comprehensively.
3) To enhance key position guidance information relative
to different modalities in the attention module mask,
we propose a deformable interactive attention module
(DIA-Module). By dynamically adjusting the gradient
after both global and local representations of the input
features, the DIA-Module achieves adaptive interactive
learning of global background information and local
edge information. This approach ensures that the generated mask possesses a more comprehensive ability to
select spatial information.
The rest of this article is organized as follows. Section II
describes the foundation related to the methodology of this
article. Section III details our main approach. Section IV
outlines the experiments conducted to verify the validity of
the module. Section V concludes this article.
II. R ELATED W ORK
This section will introduce two tasks related to our method
in detail. They are SSMs and multimodal RS fusion classification task.
A. SSMs in the Visual Field
SSMs [35] is a linear recurrent neural structures that can
establish dependencies between different sequence targets.
In order to transform SSM into a time-varying manner to
obtain feature adaptability, Gu and Dao [36] proposed the
selective SSM (S6) in Mamba, which maps the time sequence
xt ∈ R L×D through the time step h t ∈ R L×N . Not only
enables Mamba to achieve ultra-long-range dependencies but
also maintains stable gradients and minimizes time costs. The
following is the discrete state space equation of SSM:
h t = Ah t−1 + Bxt
yt = Cht

(1)

where A ∈ R L×D×N and B ∈ R L×D×N represent discrete
weight parameters, and C ∈ R L×N is the projection parameters. L represents the number of channels, D means the number of sequences, and N represents the state dimension of S6.
Mamba’s exceptional sequence modeling capabilities have
facilitated its rapid expansion into the field of visual tasks.
Zhu et al. [37] divided the image into patches suitable for
sequence model processing, thereby establishing dependencies
among the local features of the image. Chen et al. [38]
changed the forward sequence of the SSM into three sequence
forms: forward, reverse and random, thereby further enhancing
the interaction capabilities of local features in RS images.
Liu et al. [39] replaced the kernel of the SSM, enabling it
to process 2-D data instead of just 1-D, thus adapting it for
visual tasks. However, the application of these visual tasks
to sequences remains limited to local dependencies among

Authorized licensed use limited to: China Three Gorges University. Downloaded on March 25,2025 at 10:52:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MA et al.: ADAPTIVE DUAL-SUPERVISED CROSS-DEEP DEPENDENCY NETWORK

Fig. 1.

4402713

ADCD-Net. (a) Training stage I. (b) Training stage II.

different input patches and does not establish interactive
connections regarding global relationships.

A. Adaptive Dual-Supervised Cross-Deep
Dependency Network

B. Multimodal RS Fusion Classification
Multimodal RS fusion classification is a complex task
involving multiple data fusion and classification techniques,
the purpose of which is to improve the classification accuracy
of RS images.
The GCFNet [40] performed decision fusion and probability
estimation on multispectral (MS) and panchromatic (PAN)
images using a probability-based weighting strategy, which
improved the classification performance in complex urban
scenes. The DFINet [41] obtained cross-information from
multisource RS images by balancing consistency and discrimination losses, thereby enhancing the feature discrimination
among different object categories. The NNCNet [42] harvested neighbor-valued features through contrastive learning
to strengthen the semantic connections between local patches,
thereby achieving a more detailed and precise interpretation of
ground objects. The MFT [43] cleverly borrowed the concept
of tokenization used in the Vit [24] framework to generate
classification (CLS) and HSI patch tokens, prompting the
hierarchical feature space to learn singular features.

Due to the variability in the contribution of different depth
features to classification, we design an ADCD-Net (Fig. 1).
It optimizes training by assisting supervised learning with selfsupervised tasks.
The ADCD-Net comprises two stages. In stage I, multispectral (MS) and panchromatic (PAN) images undergo perceptual
loss calculations based on their deep features, thereby enhancing their semantic similarity in a self-supervised manner. The
deep features obtained in stage I are utilized in stage II to
improve feature representation capabilities, thereby enhancing
cross-depth interaction and the final classification results.
We use the lightweight framework MobileNetV3 [44] as the
basic convolution module to minimize inference time while
maintaining accuracy. The specific working process is outlined
as follows.
1) Stage I (Semantic Perceptual Self-Supervision): Since
RS datasets incur high data annotation costs, the proportion
of true labels is small and there is a significant number of
challenging samples. To avoid relying solely on limited labels
in supervised learning, we generate semantic features that
are beneficial to supervised systems through self-supervised
preprocessing in stage I.
The semantic information of multimodal RS images of the
same scene should tend to be consistent following deep feature
extraction. However, the spectral advantages of MS and the
textural advantages of PAN images often result in significant
differences in semantic information. This disparity can lead
to information interference and contextual inconsistencies in
localized areas during the fusion process. To address this issue,
we propose a semantic perceptual SPS that uses similarity
loss to train the deep features of both MS and PAN images
to learn each other’s semantic features. The acquisition of
similar semantic features will enhance the deep features in
the second stage, thereby minimizing semantic discrepancies

III. M ETHODOLOGY
In order to effectively utilize the semantic information
optimized by self-supervised loss to enhance the classification feature representation ability, and at the same time to
promote the global feature long-range dependence for classification network, we propose an ADCD-Net (see Section III-A)
for multimodal RS image fusion classification. The training process is divided into two stages: stage I (semantic
perceptual self-supervision) incorporates a semantic perceptual self-supervision strategy (SPS) (see Section III-A) and
stage II (multibranch supervised) includes a DTM-Module (see
Section III-B). Additionally, a DIA-Module (see Section III-C)
is utilized in both stages.

Authorized licensed use limited to: China Three Gorges University. Downloaded on March 25,2025 at 10:52:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4402713

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

during fusion and alleviating the challenges associated with
model training.
First, the original MS IMS ∈ RW ×H ×4 and PAN IPAN ∈
4W ×4H ×1
R
images are input into several MNv3Units for
feature extraction to obtain Fm ∈ RW/2×H/2×128 and F p ∈
RW/2×H/2×128
Fm = Net1 (IMS )
F p = Net2 (IPAN )

(2)

where Net1 (·) and Net2 (·) contain three MNv3Units
respectively.
Then, Fm and F p will be input into the DIA-Module to
remove excess redundancy and obtain Fmg ∈ RW/2×H/2×128
and Fpg ∈ RW/2×H/2×128

Fmg , Fpg = DIA Fm , F p
(3)
where DIA (·) means DIA-Module.
Next, Fmg and Fpg will be converted to Msk ∈ RW/2×H/2×128
and Psk ∈ RW/2×H/2×128 through sigmoid function, which will
be used as the weights of stage II deep features to reconstruct
the semantic information. Meanwhile, Fmg and Fpg will be
flattened and input MLP to obtain Mcls ∈ R256 and Pcls ∈ R512
as a priori semantic information input to the DTM-Module for
learning

Msk , Psk = σ Fmg , Fpg
(4)

Mcls , Pcls = Ml Fl Fmg , Fpg
(5)
where σ (·) represents the sigmoid function, Fl (·) indicates
flatten operation, and Ml (·) represents multilayer perceptron
(MLP) operation.
Furthermore, given that multimodal RS images depict the
same scene, the semantic features are likely to exhibit consistency. Building on this premise, we utilize the SPS strategy
to compute the loss between the deep information of each
modality while striving to minimize the discrepancies between
them as effectively as possible. This approach facilitates the
complementarity of individual features and enhances the richness of deep features. Specifically, we input Fmg and Fpg into
the convolution, DIA-Module, and ReLU activation functions
as the ith (i = 1) layer of self-supervised perceptual features


X 1 = Re DIA Conv Fmg + Fmg


Y1 = Re DIA Conv Fpg + Fpg
(6)
where Conv (·) represents a 3 × 3 convolution and Re (·) indicates ReLU activation function. The subsequent ith (i >= 2)
layer will use a convolution and ReLU activation function

X i = Re Conv Fmg

Yi = Re Conv Fpg .
(7)
Finally, the mean squared error of the perceptual features
from each layer will be calculated, and the overall mean will
be taken as the output of the self-supervised perceptual loss
1 Pn
L dpl =
(X i − Yi )2 .
n i=1

(8)

The semantic perceptual SPS promotes direct learning
of deep features across different modalities, enabling each
modality to develop a negative feedback mechanism that
uncovers non-singular features. This process enhances the
complementarity of semantic information. Additionally, this
form of mutual supervision reduces the differences between
modalities, thereby promoting the effectiveness of the fusion
process and improving the representational capacity of the
features.
2) Stage II (Multibranch Supervised): The direct fusion
of semantic information characterized by significant disparities can result in mutual interference, complicating the
model’s ability to comprehend the integrated data. Therefore,
we employ prior knowledge that encompasses similar semantic
information (Msk and Psk ) gathered during stage I as learnable
weights for the current deep features. This approach effectively
mitigates modal differences and enhances both spectral and
detailed features. At the same time, we design a DTM-Module
to dynamically adjust the importance of various deep features.
The sequences with prior knowledge (Mcls and Pcls ) generated
in stage I will serve as learnable parameters, and ultimately,
the DTM-Module will output the learned results.
To alleviate the problem caused by semantic differences,
we multiply the obtained weights Msk and Psk by the deep
′
′
′
′
features Fmg and Fpg , respectively [the Fmg and Fpg acquisition
process in stage II are exactly the same as Fmg and Fpg ,
′
′
see (2) and (3)]. After adding the residuals Fmg and Fpg ,
they are flattened and fused to get Fc , which is sent to the
fully connected network (CNet ) to obtain the categorical cross
entropy loss L ce
 ′

 ′

′
′
Fc = Fl Fmg ⊗ Msk + Fmg + Fl Fpg ⊗ Psk + Fpg
(9)
N

L ce = −

C

1 XX
yij log(CNet (Fc ))ij
N i=1 j=1

(10)

where N is the number of samples, C indicates the classification category number, yij is used to denote the probabilistic
truth of the sample, CNet (Fc )ij denotes the probability predicted
by the model, i means the predicted category, and j denotes
the true category.
Finally, the output features of the two modalities will also be
classified twice independently, resulting in two cross-entropy
losses L pce and L mce [see (15)]. The total loss of the
ADCD-Net is

L class = L ce + w L pce + L mce
(11)
where w means loss ratio (see Section IV-B).
The ADCD-Net employs supervised training as the main
method and self-supervised training as an auxiliary method,
which effectively combines self-learned semantic information
as prior knowledge into the supervised learning process,
resulting in improved training outcomes even with a limited
number of training samples.
B. Deep Temporal Mamba Module
Feature maps of different depths can be regarded as continuous features of different time series. However, multimodal

Authorized licensed use limited to: China Three Gorges University. Downloaded on March 25,2025 at 10:52:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MA et al.: ADAPTIVE DUAL-SUPERVISED CROSS-DEEP DEPENDENCY NETWORK

4402713

Fig. 3.

Fig. 2.

DTM-Module.

RS image classification typically conducts probability estimation primarily based on high-level semantics. This approach
diminishes the significance of non-semantic attributes, such
as shallow texture and basic shape information, which can be
crucial for classification tasks in certain scenarios. Therefore,
we introduce the concept of image time series and design a
DTM-Module (Fig. 2) to realize the connection between the
overall network features, thereby enhancing the representational capacity of the modality.
Feature maps at different depths of the network exhibit
distinct global properties, which we can analogize to various
time steps of global information interaction. In the MS branch,
′
′
we first select the outputs (Fα , Fβ , Fm , Fmg ) of Net1 (three
MNv3Units) and the DIA-Module as the initial features. These
features are concatenated after being flattened and then input
into a fully connected layer to obtain Tm−2 . Additionally,
to provide Mamba’s learnable parameters with valuable prior
information, we concatenate the deep semantic features Mcls
obtained in stage I as one of the sequences at the end of Tm−2 ,
so that the prior parameters to automatically learn the global
dependencies between features at different levels
  

′
′
Tm−2 = Concat Ml Fl Fα , Fβ , Fm , Fmg
(12)
Tm−1 = Concat(Tm−2 , Mcls ).

(13)

Then, the deep sequence features are fed into Mamba
Encoder for feature interaction
(
Tm = Ml (Ac (z) ⊗ SSM(Co1 (x)))
(14)
s.t. x, z = Ml (Norm(Tm−1 ))
where SSM(·) means selective SSM [see (1)], Co1 (·) represents
1-D convolution, Ac (·) means SiLU activation function, and
Norm(·) indicates the normalization function.
Finally, we take the last dimension of the interaction features
for MLP and classification tasks
V
C

 
1 XX
L mce = −
yij log Ml TmD ij .
V i=1 j=1

(15)

The PAN branch also has the same training process, and the
classification loss L pce is obtained.

DIA-Module.

The DTM-Module effectively utilizes the classification
token along with prior semantic information to have good
semantic understanding ability when initialized. This not only
improves the convergence efficiency of the training process
but also enables various modalities to extract their significant
features. Additionally, the module facilitates the cross-layer
transmission of high-level semantic information and low-level
texture details through a linear recursive neural structure,
thereby capturing the global dependencies between features at
different levels rather than focusing solely on local features.
C. Deformable Interactive Attention Module
On the one hand, due to the discreteness of images, some
difficult sampling points are likely to appear, which is not
conducive to the convergence of spatial information. On the
other hand, in attention, we usually focus on advantageous
features such as the texture of PAN and the background of MS
images. However, if we only focus on the dominant features
of a certain modality, it is easy to lose other features, and it
is also difficult to achieve interactive enhancement from them.
Therefore, we design a DIA-Module (Fig. 3), which can not
only remove channel redundancy but also weaken the sample
points that are not conducive to classification improvement,
while improving the information aggregation ability of the
mask.
First, we perform channel dimension compression on Fd ∈
RW ×H ×C through global average (G A ) and maximum (G M )
pooling to obtain Fa1 ∈ RW ×H ×1 and Fm1 ∈ RW ×H ×1 with
both global smoothness and local texture properties
Fa1 = G A (Fd )
Fm1 = G M (Fd ).

(16)

Larger size features will put pressure on computational
costs. At the same time, in order to maintain a large correlation
between the adjacent sample points of the output feature block,
Fa1 and Fm1 will be downsampled into Fa2 ∈ RW/2×H/2×1 and
Fm2 ∈ RW/2×H/2×1 as the main input for weight learning.

Fa2 , Fm2 = Down Fa1 , Fm1 .
(17)
Compared with PAN images, MS images have obvious
advantages in global and smooth features, but less texture
detail information. In order to find the most contributing
feature space positions through the interaction of primary and
secondary attribute features of the modality, we set interdependent modulation coefficients for Fa2 and Fm2 , changing

Authorized licensed use limited to: China Three Gorges University. Downloaded on March 25,2025 at 10:52:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4402713

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

their original shapes to obtain Fa3 ∈ RW/2×H/2×1 and Fm3 ∈
RW/2×H/2×1 to achieve feature reconstruction. To control the
relative influence of the modulation coefficients, we set a
gradient scaling factor for each modulation coefficient. In the
MS branch, we set a smaller gradient scaling factor λ1 for the
modulation coefficient generated by Fm2 to reduce its parameter
update rate, thereby stably obtaining texture features with high
compatibility and avoiding fluctuations in training loss; we
set a larger gradient scaling factor λ2 for the modulation
coefficient generated by Fa2 as a means of rapid convergence of
global features, which can quickly promote the reconstruction
of texture attribute features by spectral information

Fa3 = Mar Fm2 , λ1 ⊗ Fa2

Fm3 = Mar Fa2 , λ2 ⊗ Fm2
(18)
where Mar (F, λ) represents the modulation coefficient generator, which generates the modulation coefficient from the input
feature F with the assistance of the gradient scaling factor
λ.1 Due to the different image properties, we set the gradient
scaling factor of the PAN branch modulation coefficient in the
opposite way.
Then, we upsample Fa3 and Fm3 to maintain the similarity
of adjacent points. The two are input into the convolution
Conv (·) and sigmoid σ (·) functions after concatenated together
to generate the masks Fmask ∈ RW ×H ×1

Fa4 , Fm4 = U p Fa3 , Fm3
(19)

4
4
Fmask = σ Conv Fa ⊕ Fm
(20)
where U p (·) means upsampling.
Finally, the Fmask is multiplied to the original feature Fd to
generate Fdi
Fdi = Fmask ⊗ Fd .

(21)

The deformable interaction attention module (DIA-Module)
uses different pooling strategies to generate features that
exhibit attribute differences. It utilizes modulation coefficients across attributes through a specific gradient adjustment
method, which reconstructs the morphology of the feature
block and reduces redundant sample point information. Simultaneously, the interaction among different attribute features
encourages greater participation of neurons and learnable
parameters in the training process, thereby enhancing the
representational capacity of mask space features.
The ADCD-Net (pseudocode provided in Algorithm 1)
enhances semantic features by integrating prior semantic information obtained from the self-supervisory system with the
information aggregation capabilities of the DIA-Module. The
DTM-Module takes the global information of each network
layer as input and learns the rules for positive changes, thereby
realizing intra-modal feature interaction and further enhancing
the classification performance of deep semantic information
within ADCD-Net.

1 In this article, the values of λ and λ in the MS branch are 0.1 and 0.4,
1
2
respectively, and the values of λ1 and λ2 in the PAN branch are 0.4 and 0.1,
respectively.

Algorithm 1 ADCD-Net Process
Input: I M S : the MS image; I P AN : the PAN image; Igt : the
ground-truth of MS image;
Output: Pmodel : trained model;
1: epoch = 0;
2: while epoch < epoch StageI do
3:
Fm = f m (I M S ) (Eq. (2));
4:
F p = f p (I P AN ) (Eq. (2));
5:
Fmg , F pg = f d (Fm , F p ) (Eq. (3) and Sec. III-C);
6:
Feature collection: Msk , Psk , Mcls , Pcls
=
f co (Fmg , F pg ) (Eq. (4) and Eq. (5));
7:
Perceptual loss calculation: L d pl = L pc (Fmg , F pg )
(Eq. (6), Eq. (7) and Eq. (8));
8:
epoch = epoch + 1;
9: end while
10: while epoch StageI < epoch < epochCount do
′
11:
Fm = f m (I M S ) ;
′
12:
F p = f p (I P AN ) ;
′
′
′
′
13:
Fmg , F pg = f d (Fm , F p ) ;
′
′
14:
Feature fusion: Fc = F f (Fmg , F pg , Msk , Psk )
(Eq. (9));
15:
Deep feature interaction:
′
′
16:
Tm = f di (F1 , F2 , .., Fm , Fmg , Mcls ) (Sec. III-B);
′
′
, Pcls ) (Sec. III-B);
17:
T p = f di (F1 , F2 , .., F p , F pg
18:
Loss calculation: L class = L ce (Igt , f c (Fc )) +
w(L ce (Igt , f c (Tm )) + L ce (Igt , f c (T p ))) (Eq. (11));
19:
epoch = epoch + 1;
20: end while

IV. E XPERIMENTAL S TUDY
A. Dataset Description and Experimental Settings
In this section, we evaluate the superiority of the ADCD-Net
using multispectral (MS) and panchromatic (PAN) images.
Additionally, we employ a hyperspectral (HSI) and a
light detection and ranging (LiDAR) dataset for migration
validation.
1) Xi’an Dataset: Fig. 4(a) shows a set of ground observation images from Xi’an, China. The MS image size is
800 × 830, consisting of four spectral bands with a resolution
of 8 m. The PAN image size is 2400 × 2520, consisting of
a single-channel spectral band with a resolution of 2 m. The
dataset contains real annotations for seven types of ground
scenes, with sample numbers being 294 468. We fixedly
extracted a total of 7774 real samples from each category
as training samples and 286 694 samples after removing the
neighboring regions as test samples.
2) Hohhot Dataset: Fig. 4(b) shows a set of ground observation images from Hohhot, China. The MS image size
is 2001 × 2101, consisting of four spectral bands with a
resolution of 8 m. The PAN image size is 8004 × 8404, with
a resolution of 2 m. The dataset contains 11 ground scenes
with real annotations, with sample numbers being 287 006.
We fixedly extracted a total of 12 961 real samples from
each category as training samples and 274 045 samples after
removing the neighboring regions as test samples.
3) Nanjing Dataset: Fig. 4(c) shows a set of ground observation images from Nanjing, China. The MS image size is

Authorized licensed use limited to: China Three Gorges University. Downloaded on March 25,2025 at 10:52:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MA et al.: ADAPTIVE DUAL-SUPERVISED CROSS-DEEP DEPENDENCY NETWORK

4402713

Fig. 4. (a) Xi’an, (b) Hohhot, and (c) Nanjing datasets: the five columns represent the MS image, the PAN image, ground-truth of training samples,
ground-truth of testing samples, and corresponding labels.

moment estimate (Adam). Indicators such as overall accuracy
(OA), average accuracy (AA), and Kappa statistic (Kappa) are
used in the experimental study. Environment configuration:
The experimental research is conducted on an AMAX workstation running Ubuntu 16.04 LTS with an NVIDIA 2080Ti
graphics card. PyTorch framework and Python 3.9 are used
for various experimental tasks.
Fig. 5. Trento dataset. The five columns represent the HSI image, LiDAR
image, ground truth of disjoint training samples, ground truth of disjoint test
samples, and corresponding labels.

2000×2500, consisting of four spectral bands with a resolution
of 8 m. The PAN image size is 8000×10 000, with a resolution
of 2 m. The dataset contains 11 ground scenes with real
annotations, with sample numbers being 476 879. We fixedly
extracted a total of 14 018 real samples from each category
as training samples and 462 863 samples after removing the
neighboring regions as test samples.
4) Trento Dataset: Fig. 5 shows images collected from a
rural area south from Trento, Italy. An AISA Eagle sensor is
used to collect HSI data, and an Optech ALTM 3100EA sensor
collected LiDAR data. The HSI consists of 166 × 600 pixels
and 63 spectral bands with wavelengths ranging from 0.42 to
0.99 µm. The LiDAR images have the same scale and contain
elevation data in one raster with a spectral resolution of 9.2 nm.
The dataset includes labels for six different types of scenes.
We fixedly extract a total of 819 real samples from each
category for training, and the remaining 29 395 samples are
used as test samples.
Model training parameters: weight decay is set to 0.0005,
the number of epochs for stage I is 5, the number of epochs
for stage II is 25, and the initial learning rate is 0.0003. For
the Xi’an and Trento datasets, a batch size of 32 is employed,
whereas a batch size of 128 is utilized for the Hohhot and
Nanjing datasets. The optimization function uses the adaptive

B. Selection of Hyperparameters
Using the control variable technique, we conduct a
comprehensive quantitative analysis of the hyperparameter
classification loss ratio w in this section. In the process of
summing classification losses with different evaluation performance, setting the loss ratio w high will make the interactive
features more complex, thereby increasing the difficulty of
training and gradient stability; setting the loss ratio w low
will easily lead to a decrease in the model’s sensitivity
to shallow features, thereby ignoring its contribution to the
classification task. Table I shows the comparison results of
setting different loss ratios on different datasets, which means
that when w is set to 0.8, the classification performance is
optimal. It is because this setting not only keeps the two losses
at similar magnitudes to stabilize training, but also captures
more intricate details and features at multiple levels, resulting
in richer feature representations and enhancing the model’s
generalization ability.
C. Ablation Study: the Establishment of Network Architecture
We randomly select the Nanjing dataset to conduct a
combinatorial experiment on the proposed semantic perceptual
SPS, deformable interactive attention (DIA) module, and deep
temporal Mamba (DTM) module. Based on the comparative
results of various combinations, we analyze the effectiveness
and necessity of each module. The specific experimental
results are presented in Table II.

Authorized licensed use limited to: China Three Gorges University. Downloaded on March 25,2025 at 10:52:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4402713

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

Fig. 6. Visualizations of the results for Xi’an using various methods. Each method contains two visualizations: one at the top showing the full image and one
at the bottom showing the image with the true labels. The eight columns from left to right represent CRHFF [45], AM3 Net [46], GCFNet [40], MFT [43],
DFINet [41], NNCNet [42], ISSP-Net [47], and ADCD-Net.
TABLE I
E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS OF H YPERPARAMETER L OSS R ATIO w

TABLE II
A BLATION E XPERIMENTS ON THE NANJING DATASET

Table II shows that after adding the SPS module, the OA
value is 1.55% higher than the baseline network. The SPS
strategy passes similar semantic information to stage II feature
layer through self-supervision and perceptual loss, effectively
reducing the difference in semantic information and improving
the efficiency of feature fusion. After adding the DIA-Module,
the OA value is 1.01% higher. The DIA module uses adaptively learned modulation coefficients to sparse feature blocks
and generate masks with more directionality and rich spatial
information to alleviate the loss of interesting information
during the de-redundancy process. The DTM module focuses
on the feature changes from shallow to deep in the network,
and enhances the semantic information of different modalities
through the interaction between the two. In addition, the two
modalities also use classification loss for back propagation
separately, which directly guide the correction of feature
values, so the overall OA value reaches the highest level.
D. Experiment Results and Comparison Algorithms
We compare ADCD-Net with seven advanced methods in experiments, including CRHFF [45], AM3 Net [46],
GCFNet [40], MFT [43], DFINet [41], NNCNet [42], and
ISSP-Net [47]. All comparison methods utilized the default
parameters from the original studies to ensure the optimal
presentation of results.

1) Experimental Conclusions and Explorations on Xi’an
Dataset: Table III and Fig. 6 illustrate the various indicators
and classification visualization results for the Xi’an dataset.
The CRHFF [45] uses stacked autoencoders (AEs) to gather
local multiresolution information and perform fine-grained
fusion, which prompts more texture-detailed features to participate in the classification process, and thus has relatively
good results in the c3 (road, 73.80%) and c7 (water, 98.04%)
categories, which are biased toward simple textures. However,
its fusion process is a direct concatenation of depth semantic information from various scales, which may lead to the
problems of feature redundancy and imbalance.
The AM3 Net [46] designs an involution operator that gives
it the ability to independently measure the contribution of
each spectral channel to feature construction. This results in
good performance on classes characterized by local diversity,
such as c1 (building, 84.27%). The modality-oriented approach
taps into the spatial information of different modalities to
facilitate fusion, but it also neglects the spectral information
of multispectral images, contributing to poor results in c2
(flatland, 35.89%) and c5 (soil, 55.32%) categories.
The GCFNet [40] effectively promotes the contribution of
global information by designing an adaptive loss-weighted
fusion strategy that selectively interacts with the semantic
information formed by different modalities, as well as fused
features, respectively, thus providing better results in the
obvious categories of color-field features such as c5 (soil,
80.74%) and c6 (tree, 88.36%); however, it is also the simple
loss-weighting that neglects the contribution of spatial details
in the shallow panchromatic images.
The MFT [43] improves the transformer encoder module,
enabling it to establish long-distance dependencies between
feature blocks, which is extremely suitable for multichannel
feature processing interactions of HSIs. However, it has poor
ability to collect detailed texture features of panchromatic

Authorized licensed use limited to: China Three Gorges University. Downloaded on March 25,2025 at 10:52:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MA et al.: ADAPTIVE DUAL-SUPERVISED CROSS-DEEP DEPENDENCY NETWORK

4402713

TABLE III
Q UANTITATIVE R ESULTS OF THE X I ’ AN DATASET

images, so it performs poorly in the c3 (road, 43.74%) category
with very obvious texture features.
The DFINet [41] uses deep cross-attention to obtain effective local detail information based on removing a large
amount of redundancy. Meanwhile, the deep convolutional
operation combined with channel mixing operation makes
the information of different scales highly transferable, thus
giving excellent results in both c2 (flatland, 52.87%), c3
(road, 80.65%), and c7 (water, 98.71%) categories. However,
the simple fusion makes the complementary information not
effectively integrated, so the overall effect is not as good as
ADCD-Net.
The NNCNet [42] captures the semantic arrangement
between adjacent data through a contrastive learning framework and establishes dependencies among local features.
At the same time, bilinear attention is used to promote the
interaction of second-order features across different modalities. As a result, the overall effect is better than DFINet.
However, this self-supervised system lacks consideration of
singular feature extraction, and the detailed information from
multimodal images cannot be effectively collected. It is much
lower than DFINet and ADCD-Net in the c2 (flatland, 38.35%)
and c3 (road, 59.89%) categories.
The ISSP-Net [47] uses a pixel-guided spatial enhancement module (PGSE-Module) to improve spatial position
interaction, integrate multiscale contextual information, and
emphasize pixel-level features. At the same time, adaptive
Fourier transform is used to learn to distinguish useful
frequency-domain features. The effective superposition of
pixel information and frequency information makes it more
sensitive to certain texture features, thus achieving better
classification results in the c4 (shadow, 83.35%) category.
The ADCD-Net network adopts a self-supervised system,
which gives rich similarity prior knowledge to deep semantic
features during supervised training, so that the fused global
information has stronger generalization ability, making the
c5 (soil, 93.09%) categories have the best results, while c1
(building, 84.71%) and c4 (shadow, 77.40%) also have relatively good performance. At the same time, the implementation
of deformable attention promotes the effective removal of
redundancy and the collection of spatial location information.

Cross-depth interaction further enhances the representation
ability of semantic information and promotes the effectiveness
of the probability estimation process, so the overall OA
(84.69%), AA (79.78%), and Kappa (80.38%) are all optimal.
Finally, as shown in Table III, our parameters are basically in the same order of magnitude as other advanced
networks. Although our method requires a longer inference
time than other algorithms, it achieves very good classification
performance in the same order of magnitude. In the future,
we will strive to optimize network parameters and inference
capabilities to achieve better training efficiency and accuracy.
2) Experimental Conclusions and Explorations on Hohhot
Dataset: Table IV and Fig. 7 illustrate the various indicators
and classification visualization results for the Hohhot dataset.
The ADCD-Net establishes global feature dependencies across
depths, so it has good results in categories such as c1 (water,
97.31%), c2 (road, 86.27%), and c4 (vegetation, 89.64%) with
obvious texture and spectral features. At the same time, our
network has the best results on OA (74.63%), AA (77.53%),
and Kappa (71.30%). The OA of ADCD-Net is better than that
of DFINet, NNCNet, and ISSP-Net, which are improved by
1.71%, 3.78%, and 0.86%, respectively. While DFINet demonstrates some spectral collection capability, it only performs
better in category c10 (red building, 84.56%). This is due to the
imbalance of information collection ability of different spectra
and only sensitivity to certain color domains, which is also
reflected in our model. Although NNCNet is more sensitive
to the local dense feature category c5 (intensive building,
67.63%), it lacks the ability to effectively collect spectral
information, and thus has lower effects on c9 , c10 , and c11 .
Therefore, from the visualization results in Fig. 7, we can see
that the ADCD-Net mislabels fewer regions. It shows results
with better categorization in categories such as vegetation and
white buildings compared to other methods.
3) Experimental Conclusions and Explorations on Nanjing
Dataset: Table V and Fig. 8 illustrate the various indicators and classification visualization results for the Nanjing
dataset. The ADCD-Net relies on excellent feature interaction
capabilities, enabling more than one-third of the categories to
achieve optimal classification accuracy. At the same time, our
network has the best results on OA (80.62%), AA (77.69%),

Authorized licensed use limited to: China Three Gorges University. Downloaded on March 25,2025 at 10:52:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4402713

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

TABLE IV
Q UANTITATIVE R ESULTS OF THE H OHHOT DATASET

TABLE V
Q UANTITATIVE R ESULTS OF THE NANJING DATASET

Fig. 7. Visualizations of the results for Hohhot using various methods. Each method contains two visualizations: one at the top showing the full image and
one at the bottom showing the image with the true labels. The eight columns from left to right represent CRHFF [45], AM3 Net [46], GCFNet [40], MFT [43],
DFINet [41], NNCNet [42], ISSP-Net [47], and ADCD-Net.

and Kappa (77.47%). The OA of ADCD-Net is better than that
of DFINet, NNCNet, and ISSP-Net, which are improved by
2.62%, 2.85%, and 5.61%, respectively. The AM3 Net ability
to capture spatial locations drives extremely good categorization in categories c9 (sparse building, 80.99%) and c10

(rail, 91.86%). The DFINet utilizes multichannel interaction to
achieve spectral and resolution collection, and has advantages
in global background feature extraction, with better results in
categories c1 (water, 96.18%) and c4 (vegetation, 88.77%).
However, from the visualization results in Fig. 8, we can see

Authorized licensed use limited to: China Three Gorges University. Downloaded on March 25,2025 at 10:52:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MA et al.: ADAPTIVE DUAL-SUPERVISED CROSS-DEEP DEPENDENCY NETWORK

4402713

TABLE VI
Q UANTITATIVE R ESULTS OF THE T RENTO DATASET

Fig. 8. Visualizations of the results for Nanjing using various methods. Each method contains two visualizations: one at the top showing the full image and
one at the bottom showing the image with the true labels. The eight columns from left to right represent CRHFF [45], AM3 Net [46], GCFNet [40], MFT [43],
DFINet [41], NNCNet [42], ISSP-Net [47], and ADCD-Net.

that the ADCD-Net mislabels fewer regions. It shows results
with better categorization in categories such as red, white, and
blue buildings compared to other methods.
E. Task Transfer Learning
We compare the ADCD-Net with seven algorithms for HSI
and LiDAR image fusion classification in transfer experiments to test the robustness of the proposed model, including
CNN3D [48], EndNet [49], SpectralFormer [50], S2 ENet [51],
MFT [43], DFINet [41], and Cross-HL [52].
Table VI and Fig. 9 show the various indicators and classification visualization results for the Trento dataset, respectively.
The ADCD-Net maintains the highest classification accuracy
in the OA (99.33%), AA (98.41%), and Kappa (99.03%) evaluation indicators, and has the highest accuracy in three of the
six categories within the dataset. The ADCD-Net OA is 1.01%,
0.41%, and 0.64% higher than the advanced, MFT, DFINet,
and Cross-HL, respectively. This is attributed to the excellent
interaction ability of our model’s deep information, which
leads to stronger generalization performance. The DFINet can
effectively collect the difference information between different
channels of HSI through cross-scale interaction. The road
surface has a high degree of recognition and has obvious
difference characteristics, so it has better results in categories
c3 (road, 99.19%). The Cross-HL uses a novel self-attention
module to fuse patch projections of different modalities, which
enhances the accurate information exchange of spectrum and
space, thus achieving a high level of overall classification
accuracy. However, from the visualization results in Fig. 9,
we can see that the area marked by ADCD-Net is smoother.
It shows fewer error points in the results for categories like
buildings and apple than other methods.

Fig. 9. Visualisations of classification for Trento using the various methods.
Each method includes two visualizations: one at the top with only real labels
and the other at the bottom showing the full image. The eight columns from
left to right represent CNN3D [48] (a) and (b), EndNet [49] (c) and (d),
SpectralFormer [50] (e) and (f), S2 ENet [51] (g) and (h), MFT [43]
(i) and (j), DFINet [41] (k) and (l), Cross-HL [52] (m) and (n), and ADCD-Net
(o) and (p).

From the experimental data, it is evident that the accuracy
of ADCD-Net surpasses that of most comparable algorithms
of the same type, and it also demonstrates a strong capability
for transfer learning.
V. C ONCLUSION
In this article, we propose an ADCD-Net for RS
image fusion classification. The ADCD-Net leverages the

Authorized licensed use limited to: China Three Gorges University. Downloaded on March 25,2025 at 10:52:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4402713

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

advantageous prior knowledge acquired from semantic perceptual SPS in stage I to the supervised training process
through a staged hybrid supervised learning. This integration mitigates the information conflict arising from semantic
differences in fusion and enhances the consistency of the
fusion results. The DTM-Module establishes global dependencies among features at various network depths, thereby
amplifying the contribution of shallow features to probabilistic
predictions. The DIA-Module improves the spatial directional
focus of the mask through feature reconstruction and mutual
attention, facilitating effective de-redundancy while capturing
richer spatial information. We validate the effectiveness and
portability of the ADCD-Net across four datasets. However,
the phased training method we use greatly increases model
complexity and the number of parameters, resulting in greater
time and hardware requirements when working with larger
datasets. In the future, we will concentrate on addressing these
challenges while preserving accuracy.
R EFERENCES
[1] Y. Himeur, B. Rimal, A. Tiwary, and A. Amira, “Using artificial
intelligence and data fusion for environmental monitoring: A review and
future perspectives,” Inf. Fusion, vols. 86–87, pp. 44–75, Oct. 2022.
[2] N.-B. Chang, K. Bai, S. Imen, C.-F. Chen, and W. Gao, “Multisensor
satellite image fusion and networking for all-weather environmental
monitoring,” IEEE Syst. J., vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 1341–1357, Jun. 2018.
[3] D. Li, Z. Song, C. Quan, X. Xu, and C. Liu, “Recent advances in image
fusion technology in agriculture,” Comput. Electron. Agricult., vol. 191,
Dec. 2021, Art. no. 106491.
[4] S. Wang et al., “A classification-based spatiotemporal adaptive fusion
model for the evaluation of remotely sensed evapotranspiration in heterogeneous irrigated agricultural area,” Remote Sens. Environ., vol. 273,
May 2022, Art. no. 112962.
[5] M. Fauvel, J. Chanussot, and J. A. Benediktsson, “Decision fusion for
the classification of urban remote sensing images,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 44, no. 10, pp. 2828–2838, Oct. 2006.
[6] L. Xie, X. Feng, C. Zhang, Y. Dong, J. Huang, and K. Liu, “Identification
of urban functional areas based on the multimodal deep learning fusion
of high-resolution remote sensing images and social perception data,”
Buildings, vol. 12, no. 5, p. 556, Apr. 2022.
[7] G. Scarpa, S. Vitale, and D. Cozzolino, “Target-adaptive CNN-based
pansharpening,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 56, no. 9,
pp. 5443–5457, Sep. 2018.
[8] J. Yang, X. Fu, Y. Hu, Y. Huang, X. Ding, and J. Paisley, “PanNet: A
deep network architecture for pan-sharpening,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Comput. Vis., Oct. 2017, pp. 5449–5457.
[9] L. He et al., “Pansharpening via detail injection based convolutional
neural networks,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens.,
vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 1188–1204, Apr. 2019.
[10] H. Zhu et al., “A spatial-channel progressive fusion ResNet for remote
sensing classification,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 70, pp. 72–87, Jun. 2021.
[11] W. Ma et al., “A collaborative correlation-matching network for multimodality remote sensing image classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5409718.
[12] Q. Liu, X. Meng, F. Shao, and S. Li, “Supervised-unsupervised
combined deep convolutional neural networks for high-fidelity pansharpening,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 89, pp. 292–304, Jan. 2023.
[13] L. Jiao et al., “Multiscale deep learning for detection and recognition:
A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst.,
early access, Apr. 23, 2024, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2024.3389454.
[14] X. Wu, D. Hong, and J. Chanussot, “UIU-net: U-net in U-net for
infrared small object detection,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 32,
pp. 364–376, 2023.
[15] X. Wu, D. Hong, and J. Chanussot, “Convolutional neural networks
for multimodal remote sensing data classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5517010.
[16] G. Masi, D. Cozzolino, L. Verdoliva, and G. Scarpa, “Pansharpening
by convolutional neural networks,” Remote Sens., vol. 8, no. 7, p. 594,
Jul. 2016.

[17] D. Hong, J. Yao, C. Li, D. Meng, N. Yokoya, and J. Chanussot,
“Decoupled-and-coupled networks: Self-supervised hyperspectral image
super-resolution with subpixel fusion,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5527812.
[18] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., vol. 30, 2017, pp. 1–11.
[19] L. Xu et al., “A dual-stream transformer with diff-attention for multispectral and panchromatic classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5409114.
[20] K. Zhang, Z. Li, F. Zhang, W. Wan, and J. Sun, “Pan-sharpening based
on transformer with redundancy reduction,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens.
Lett., vol. 19, pp. 1–5, 2022.
[21] L. Jiao et al., “Brain-inspired learning, perception, and cognition:
A comprehensive review,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst.,
early access, May 29, 2024, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2024.3401711.
[22] H. Zhou, Q. Liu, and Y. Wang, “PanFormer: A transformer based model
for pan-sharpening,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Multimedia Expo (ICME),
Jul. 2022, pp. 1–6.
[23] X. Meng, N. Wang, F. Shao, and S. Li, “Vision transformer for
pansharpening,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
Art. no. 5409011.
[24] A. Dosovitskiy et al., “An image is worth 16×16 words: Transformers
for image recognition at scale,” in Proc. ICLR, 2021, pp. 1–22.
[25] W. Ma et al., “Intra- and intersource interactive representation learning
network for remote sensing images classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5401515.
[26] I. Goodfellow et al., “Generative adversarial nets,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 27, 2014, pp. 1–9.
[27] J. Ma, W. Yu, C. Chen, P. Liang, X. Guo, and J. Jiang, “Pan-GAN: An
unsupervised pan-sharpening method for remote sensing image fusion,”
Inf. Fusion, vol. 62, pp. 110–120, Oct. 2020.
[28] Q. Liu, H. Zhou, Q. Xu, X. Liu, and Y. Wang, “PSGAN: A generative adversarial network for remote sensing image pan-sharpening,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 59, no. 12, pp. 10227–10242,
Dec. 2021.
[29] F. Ozcelik, U. Alganci, E. Sertel, and G. Unal, “Rethinking CNN-based
pansharpening: Guided colorization of panchromatic images via GANs,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 59, no. 4, pp. 3486–3501,
Apr. 2021.
[30] W. Diao, F. Zhang, J. Sun, Y. Xing, K. Zhang, and L. Bruzzone, “ZeRGAN: Zero-reference GAN for fusion of multispectral and panchromatic
images,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 34, no. 11,
pp. 8195–8209, Nov. 2023.
[31] L. Jiao et al., “Advanced deep learning models for 6G:
Overview, opportunities, and challenges,” IEEE Access, vol. 12,
pp. 133245–133314, 2024.
[32] Y. Rao et al., “AT-GAN: A generative adversarial network with attention
and transition for infrared and visible image fusion,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 92,
pp. 336–349, Apr. 2023.
[33] J. Ma, W. Yu, P. Liang, C. Li, and J. Jiang, “FusionGAN: A generative
adversarial network for infrared and visible image fusion,” Inf. Fusion,
vol. 48, pp. 11–26, Aug. 2019.
[34] J. Ma, H. Zhang, Z. Shao, P. Liang, and H. Xu, “GANMcC: A
generative adversarial network with multiclassification constraints for
infrared and visible image fusion,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 70,
pp. 1–14, 2021.
[35] A. Gu, K. Goel, and C. Ré, “Efficiently modeling long sequences with
structured state spaces,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2022,
pp. 1–32.
[36] A. Gu and T. Dao, “Mamba: Linear-time sequence modeling with
selective state spaces,” 2023, arXiv:2312.00752.
[37] L. Zhu, B. Liao, Q. Zhang, X. Wang, W. Liu, and X. Wang, “Vision
mamba: Efficient visual representation learning with bidirectional state
space model,” in Proc. 41st Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2024, pp. 1–14.
[38] K. Chen, B. Chen, C. Liu, W. Li, Z. Zou, and Z. Shi, “RSMamba:
Remote sensing image classification with state space model,” IEEE
Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 21, 2024, Art. no. 8002605.
[39] Y. Liu et al., “VMamba: Visual state space model,” 2024,
arXiv:2401.10166.
[40] H. Zhao et al., “GCFnet: Global collaborative fusion network for multispectral and panchromatic image classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5632814.
[41] Y. Gao et al., “Hyperspectral and multispectral classification for coastal
wetland using depthwise feature interaction network,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5512615.

Authorized licensed use limited to: China Three Gorges University. Downloaded on March 25,2025 at 10:52:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MA et al.: ADAPTIVE DUAL-SUPERVISED CROSS-DEEP DEPENDENCY NETWORK

[42] M. Wang, F. Gao, J. Dong, H.-C. Li, and Q. Du, “Nearest neighbor-based
contrastive learning for hyperspectral and LiDAR data classification,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5501816.
[43] S. K. Roy, A. Deria, D. Hong, B. Rasti, A. Plaza, and J. Chanussot,
“Multimodal fusion transformer for remote sensing image classification,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5515620.
[44] A. Howard et al., “Searching for MobileNetV3,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int.
Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019, pp. 1314–1324.
[45] S. Liu, H. Zhao, Q. Du, L. Bruzzone, A. Samat, and X. Tong,
“Novel cross-resolution feature-level fusion for joint classification of
multispectral and panchromatic remote sensing images,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5619314.
[46] J. Wang, J. Li, Y. Shi, J. Lai, and X. Tan, “AM3 net: Adaptive mutuallearning-based multimodal data fusion network,” IEEE Trans. Circuits
Syst. Video Technol., vol. 32, no. 8, pp. 5411–5426, Aug. 2022.
[47] W. Ma, H. Zhang, M. Ma, C. Chen, and B. Hou, “ISSP-Net: An interactive spatial–spectral perception network for multimodal classification,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 4412014.
[48] A. Ben Hamida, A. Benoit, P. Lambert, and C. Ben Amar, “3-D deep
learning approach for remote sensing image classification,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 56, no. 8, pp. 4420–4434, Aug. 2018.
[49] D. Hong, L. Gao, R. Hang, B. Zhang, and J. Chanussot, “Deep encoder–
decoder networks for classification of hyperspectral and LiDAR data,”
IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 19, pp. 1–5, 2022.
[50] D. Hong et al., “SpectralFormer: Rethinking hyperspectral image classification with transformers,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60,
2022, Art. no. 5518615.
[51] S. Fang, K. Li, and Z. Li, “S2 ENet: Spatial–spectral cross-modal
enhancement network for classification of hyperspectral and LiDAR
data,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 19, pp. 1–5, 2022.
[52] S. K. Roy, A. Sukul, A. Jamali, J. M. Haut, and P. Ghamisi, “Cross
hyperspectral and LiDAR attention transformer: An extended selfattention for land use and land cover classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5512815.

Wenping Ma (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
B.S. degree in computer science and technology
and the Ph.D. degree in pattern recognition and
intelligent systems from Xidian University, Xi’an,
China, in 2003 and 2008, respectively.
Since 2006, she has been with the Key Laboratory
of Intelligent Perception and Image Understanding
of the Ministry of Education, Xidian University,
where she is currently a Professor. Her research
interests include intelligent computing and image
processing.

Chuang Chen received the B.S. degree in electronic
information engineering from Inner Mongolia University of Science and Technology, Baotou, China,
in 2023. He is currently pursuing the M.S. degree
with the School of Artificial Intelligence, Xidian
University, Xi’an, China.
His research interests include image processing,
multimodal fusion, and multispectral remote sensing
image classification.

4402713

Mengru Ma received the B.S. degree in communication engineering from Hebei University of
Engineering, Handan, China, in 2019, and the
Ph.D. degree from Xidian University, Xi’an, China,
in 2024.
She is currently a Post-Doctoral Researcher with
the Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and
Image Understanding of Ministry of Education,
School of Artificial Intelligence, Xidian University.
Her research interests include deep learning, image
interpretation, and multi-resolution remote sensing
(RS) images fusion classification.

Hekai Zhang received the B.S. degree in electronic information science and technology from
Heilongjiang University, Harbin, China, in 2023.
He is currently pursuing the M.S. degree with Xidian
University, Xi’an, China.
His research interests include deep learning,
remote sensing image processing and multisource
data fusion.

Hao Zhu (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. degree
in physics and photoelectricity engineering and
the Ph.D. degree in circuits and systems from
Xidian University, Xi’an, China, in 2013 and 2019,
respectively.
He is currently an Associate Professor with
the School of Artificial Intelligence and the Key
Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Image
Understanding of Ministry of Education, Xidian
University. His research interests include multimodal
remote sensing image fusion and classification, and
remote sensing object detection and tracking.

Licheng Jiao (Fellow, IEEE) received the B.S.
degree from Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai,
China, in 1982, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from
Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China, in 1984 and
1990, respectively.
Since 1992, he has been a Professor with Xidian
University, where he is currently a Distinguished
Professor and serves with the School of Artificial
Intelligence. He currently serves as the Director of
the Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and
Image Understanding, which is affiliated with the
Ministry of Education of China. His research interests include machine learning, deep learning, natural computation, remote sensing, image processing,
and intelligent information processing.
Prof. Jiao has been a member of the Academia Europaea. He is a fellow of IEEE/IET/CAAI/CIE/CCF/CAA/CSIG/AAIA/AIIA/ACIS. He is the
Chairperson of the Awards and Recognition Committee in IEEE Xi’an Branch,
the sixth and seventh Vice Chairperson of the Chinese Association of Artificial
Intelligence, and the Chairperson of the Asian Society for Computational
Intelligence. He is a councilor of the Chinese Institute of Electronics,
a committee member of the Chinese Committee of Neural Networks, an expert
of the Academic Degrees Committee of the State Council, and an ESI highly
cited scientist.

Authorized licensed use limited to: China Three Gorges University. Downloaded on March 25,2025 at 10:52:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

