MambaLiteSR: Image Super-Resolution with
Low-Rank Mamba using Knowledge Distillation
Romina Aalishah, Mozhgan Navardi, and Tinoosh Mohsenin

arXiv:2502.14090v1 [eess.IV] 19 Feb 2025

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Johns Hopkins University
{raalish1, mnavard1, tinoosh}@jhu.edu

Abstract—Generative Artificial Intelligence (AI) has gained
significant attention in recent years, revolutionizing various applications across industries. Among these, advanced vision models
for image super-resolution are in high demand, particularly for
deployment on edge devices where real-time processing is crucial.
However, deploying such models on edge devices is challenging
due to limited computing power and memory. In this paper,
we present MambaLiteSR, a novel lightweight image SuperResolution (SR) model that utilizes the architecture of Vision
Mamba. It integrates State Space Blocks and a reconstruction
module for efficient feature extraction. To optimize efficiency
without affecting performance, MambaLiteSR employs knowledge distillation, transferring essential information from a larger
Mamba-based teacher model to a smaller student model through
hyperparameter tuning. Through a mathematical analysis of
model parameters and their impact on the Peak Signal-to-Noise
Ratio (PSNR), we identify key factors and adjust them accordingly. Our comprehensive evaluation shows that MambaLiteSR
outperforms state of the art edge SR methods by reducing
power consumption while maintaining competitive PSNR and
SSIM scores across benchmark datasets such as Set5, Set14,
and BSD100. It also reduces the power usage during training
by adopting low-rank approximation. Moreover, MambaLiteSR
reduces the total number of parameters without degrading
performance, enabling the efficient deployment of generative
AI models on resource-constrained devices. Deployment on the
embedded NVIDIA Jetson Orin Nano confirms the superior
balance of MambaLiteSR size, latency, and resource efficiency.
The experimental results show that MambaLiteSR achieves
performance comparable to both the baseline and other edge
models while using 15% fewer parameters than the baseline. It
also improves the power consumption by up to 58% compared to
state-of-the-art SR edge models, all while maintaining low energy
consumption during training.
Index Terms—Image Super-Resolution, Mamba, Knowledge
Distillation, Low-Rank Approximation, Edge Computing

I. I NTRODUCTION
Generative Artificial Intelligence (AI) models have gained
attention in recent years for their ability to generate outputs
such as images and text based on input data [1]–[3]. These
models learn the patterns and structures of training data and
use them to produce results. Image Super-Resolution (SR) is
one such task in Generative AI and computer vision. The
goal is to generate a High-Resolution (HR) image from a
Low-Resolution (LR) one [4]. An efficient SR model achieves
high Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR) and Structural Similarity (SSIM); PSNR measures the reconstruction quality by
comparing the pixel-wise difference between the HR output

and the ground truth, while SSIM evaluates the perceptual similarity by considering structural information, luminance, and
contrast. However, deploying these models on edge devices
might be challenging because of their complexity and high
intensiveness [5]–[11]. Since edge devices are constrained in
several aspects such as computing resources and power, the
importance of model size, number of parameters, and FLOPs
comes into matter [12]–[16].
Deep learning models play a crucial role in applications
such as image processing [17]. Two commonly used architectures in deep learning are Fully Connected Networks (FCNs)
and Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs). Early SR approaches relied on CNNs [18]–[20]. While small, these CNNbased methods demonstrated relatively low PSNRs. Therefore,
efforts have been made to improve the performance [21]–[23]
by removing unnecessary modules, bypassing low-frequency
information, and integrating denoising as a prior. Recently,
research has focused on developing smaller and faster models
with novel architectures, attention mechanisms, and hybrid
models [24]–[26].
With the introduction of Mamba [27], a revolution happened
in optimizing feature extraction. This architecture was quickly
adopted across various vision tasks, including image classification, object detection, and semantic segmentation [28],
[29]. Having similar results to previous works but with better
processing speed, led to its adoption in SR frameworks, where
it involved combining the lightweight structure of Mamba with
attention mechanisms and transformer-based modules [30]–
[32]. However, even though Mamba improved the latency,
model deployment on edge devices is still challenging because
of its size and power usage.
To address these challenges, we propose MambaLiteSR,
which builds on previous studies by enhancing the existing
Mamba-based architecture with significant improvements. In
this paper, we focus on minimizing the model size and power
usage during inference and training while maintaining comparable performance by optimizing the loss function, utilizing
low-rank Mamba, knowledge distillation, and carefully finetuning hyperparameters. After finalizing the architecture and
loss function, we employed low-rank approximation, which is
widely used in machine learning studies such as LoRA [33],
to decrease the power usage during training. Then, knowledge
distillation was applied to reduce the model size. To the best
of our knowledge, no existing work has explored the simulta-

neous use of Mamba, knowledge distillation, and low-rank approximation for optimizing SR generative AI models on edge
devices. In this context, we enhanced the Vision Mamba-based
model to improve performance, energy usage while training,
and compactness, ensuring it fits seamlessly on edge devices.
To evaluate the proposed MambaLiteSR, experiments were
conducted on key knowledge distillation parameters to achieve
optimal results. The experimental results demonstrate that
MambaLiteSR achieves comparable performance to baseline
and edge models while being 15% smaller than the baseline.
For edge-device evaluation, the model was tested on the
embedded NVIDIA Jetson Orin Nano [34]. The results show
that our model achieves comparable PSNR and SSIM with the
state-of-the-art edge models while consuming less dynamic
power. Our contributions for the proposed MambaLiteSR are
summarized as follows:
• Improvement of the image super-resolution model to
achieve comparable performance by optimizing the loss
function, utilizing knowledge distillation, and carefully
fine-tuning its hyperparameter.
• Assessment of the matrix ranks used in Mamba architecture on model size, performance, and training power
usage, as well as the distillation parameter α on model
performance.
• Real-world experiment by deployment of the proposed
MambaLiteSR on embedded NVIDIA Jetson Orin Nano,
with comparisons made against similar models in terms
of power usage and performance.
II. R ELATED W ORK
Image super-resolution has been a major task in computer
vision, with early approaches relying on interpolation techniques such as bicubic scaling [12], [35], [36]. While these
methods are computationally efficient, they lack adaptability
to image features and often produce artifacts like blurriness
and jagged edges in images. Advances like SRCNN [18] and
FSRCNN [20] introduced learnable features through CNNs,
significantly improving SR performance. However, these models are computationally intensive and might be challenging for
real-time deployment on resource-constrained devices.
To address efficiency concerns, lightweight SR models
such as ESPCN [37], DVMSR [30], and SRMamba-T [32]
have been proposed. ESPCN utilizes sub-pixel convolution
layers to reduce computational overhead, but it struggles to
maintain high reconstruction quality at larger scales. DVMSR,
which outperformed RLFN [38], the winner of the NTIRE
2023 Efficient Super-Resolution Challenge [39], utilizes Vision Mamba [40] modules and state space blocks to balance
efficiency and accuracy. SRMamba-T combines Mamba and
Transformer architectures to balance computational efficiency
with high performance.
Frameworks like ESHP [13] extend these advancements
by leveraging heterogeneous hardware to optimize SR tasks.
ESHP dynamically allocates CPU, GPU, and NPU resources
using deep reinforcement learning. However, its dependence
on specialized hardware ecosystems introduces complexity

Fig. 1. Architecture of DVMSR [30] and Vision Mamba [28]: Input image
is preprocessed and fed into the DVMSR model, which consists of Vision
Mamba modules, convolution layers, and a decoder.

and limits deployment flexibility. Edge-SR [12] proposes
lightweight one-layer architectures for real-time applications.
Although practical for constrained devices, its performance is
often inferior to more advanced multi-layer networks. Similarly, thermal imaging SR pipelines [41] and facial verification
systems [42] focus on specific use cases but are not flexible
enough for wider SR applications.
The proposed MambaLiteSR further advances these foundations by integrating low-rank Mamba architecture and a knowledge distillation framework, offering a unified solution to the
limitations of prior methods. Unlike simpler interpolationbased techniques, MambaLiteSR dynamically adapts to complex image features for improved SR quality. Meanwhile,
its design addresses the memory and computational constraints typically faced by CNN-based or transformer-heavy
approaches, reducing reliance on specialized hardware. By
managing parameter usage and supporting real-time deployment, MambaLiteSR provides an effective, flexible solution
for lightweight SR on edge devices.
III. BACKGROUND
Image super-resolution aims to reconstruct a high-resolution
image from a low-resolution input while keeping details.
Traditional methods cannot recover high-frequency details,
leading to blurry results [43], [44]. Deep learning-based SR
models, particularly those utilizing CNN and Transformerbased architectures [18], [20], [32], have significantly improved performance. However, these models often require
large computational resources, making deployment on edge
devices challenging. In this section, various parts contributing
to the reduction in model size and power usage are explored.
In addition, strategies for improving the performance of small
models are discussed.
Mamba and State Space Models The Mamba [27] architecture introduces Selective State Space Models, a lightweight
alternative to Transformers, that reduces computational complexity while maintaining feature extraction capabilities. The
state space representation in Mamba is formulated as follows:

IV. P ROPOSED A PPROACH
y(t) = Cx(t)

(1)

d
x(t) = Ax(t) + Bu(t)
(2)
dt
where x(t) represents the hidden state, u(t) is the input
signal and A, B, and C are learnable matrices. This structure
enables Mamba to capture long-range dependencies efficiently
while requiring fewer parameters than traditional self-attention
mechanisms. As a result, several efforts have been made to
apply this method across various tasks. Vision Mamba [28]
is such an effort that utilizes the efficient architecture of
Mamba for computer vision tasks like image classification.
Later, DVMSR [30] was proposed, utilizing Mamba Vision
in the image super-resolution task. Figure 1 demonstrates
the architecture of DVMSR and Vision Mamba, showing the
contribution of Vision Mamba to DVMSR.
Embedding Dimension The embedding dimension significantly influences the number of parameters in the model. For
an SR model, the number of parameters in a single layer can
be estimated as:
P = din × dout + dout

(3)

where din and dout are the input and output embedding
dimensions, respectively. Reducing the embedding dimension
from dbase to dsmall leads to a reduction in parameter count
by a factor of:
d2small
d2base

(4)

Low-Rank Approximation Low-rank approximation is
used to further compress the model by reducing the rank
of weight matrices while preserving essential information.
Given a weight matrix W ∈ Rm×n , a low-rank factorization
approximates W as:
W ≈ UVT

(5)

where U ∈ Rm×r and V ∈ Rn×r , with rank r ≪
min(m, n). This leads to a reduction in the number of computations, FLOPs, and less power usage.
Knowledge Distillation Knowledge distillation is employed
to transfer knowledge from a larger teacher model to a
smaller student model to have a similar performance with
fewer parameters. This process introduces a trade-off between
the soft targets of the teacher and the ground truth labels,
controlled by the parameter α. The loss function in knowledge
distillation is defined as:
L = αLKD + (1 − α)LGT

(6)

where LKD is the distillation loss calculated using teacher
soft predictions, and LGT is the loss using ground truth labels.
A higher α puts more emphasis on the teacher’s outputs. In
contrast, a lower α puts the student to rely more on the ground
truth, which may limit the benefits of distillation. In summary,
tuning α is to balance model efficiency.

To design an efficient image super-resolution model, we
build upon a Vision Mamba-based architecture while optimizing its structure and using knowledge distillation. The
goal is to maintain the performance of SR models while
reducing computational complexity and model size and simplifying it for deployment on edge devices. By combining the
efficient modeling of Mamba, embedding dimension adjustments, low-rank approximations, and tuning hyperparameters,
MambaLiteSR achieves a balanced trade-off between model
size, computational efficiency, and SR performance, making
it suited for deployment on resource-constrained devices. In
this section, we go over the main aspects and materials of our
work. Experimental results show that this combination of parameters balancing allows for a substantial reduction in model
size and energy usage while preserving high reconstruction
accuracy.
Figure 2 presents our high-level diagram, which includes
the model, knowledge distillation process, and parameters of
interest. The flow consists of the following key components:
A. Embedding Dimension
The embedding dimension is a crucial factor in model
efficiency, which directly affects the number of parameters
and computational cost. By reducing the embedding dimension
from 192 to 60 for the model, we achieve a substantial
reduction in memory and power usage, which according to the
Equation 4, leads to a 10 times reduction of the model size.
Experimental results confirm that this reduction in embedding
dimension does not significantly impact reconstruction quality
and allows for efficient deployment on edge devices.
In this study, images are cropped into smaller patches.
Specifically, from each image, eight mini-patches of 64 × 64
are extracted randomly. To further preprocess the data, random
horizontal and vertical flips and rotations are applied. Then,
each of these 64 × 64 patches is converted into a vector of 60
and 32 features, for teacher and student models respectively.
B. Large Teacher Model
The input image is first passed through a convolutional
layer, which acts as a shallow feature extractor to derive
basic feature maps. These features then go through a set of
Residual Mixed Mamba Blocks (RMMB), which consist of
several Vision Mamba modules designed to capture long-range
dependencies. Each RMMB internally contains a basic layer
with a configurable number of Blocks, each Block has exactly
one Mamba mixer inside and An internal residual convolution
and skip connection as a residual group.
Therefore, RMMBs perform deep feature extraction and
contain multiple Vision Mamba Modules along with a convolution layer and a residual connection. In the proposed large
teacher model, the Mamba layer is low-rank to reduce the
number of computations. After extracting deep features, a
global residual connection is applied to fuse shallow features
from the initial feature map with deep features. These features
are then up-sampled by a method of pixel-shuffle to create the

Fig. 2. High-Level overview of MambaLiteSR process: Low-resolution input image (64 × 64) is preprocessed and fed into the knowledge distillation
process, generating the high-resolution output (256 × 256). Weighted distillation and student losses enable the student model to learn efficiently under teacher
supervision. Proper embedding dimension, which determines the feature vector size resulting from the image patches, makes it suitable for edge devices.

final HR output. To summarize, there are 16 Mamba layers in
the teacher model with an embedding dimension of 60, which
will be covered in the following subsections.
C. Tiny Student Model
To improve efficiency, a student model is trained with a
lower number of RMMBs and a smaller embedding dimension.
The student model follows a similar architecture to the teacher
but with reduced parameters. Knowledge distillation allows the
student to mimic the performance of the teacher while being
more computationally efficient. In this work, it has 4 RMMBs,
resulting in 8 Mamba layers, with an embedding dimension of
32. The student model is optimized to keep essential features
while achieving comparable PSNR and SSIM. Note that the
input to both the teacher and student model is the same and
they go through the same flow of preprocessing.
D. Loss Block
As stated in the Equation 7, α controls the trade-off between
distillation and direct supervision, and tuning it ensures the
optimal balance between performance and model efficiency. In
the total loss function, L1 loss for both distillation and student
loss is considered. L1 loss measures the average difference
between predicted and actual values. We write the combined
loss as:

E. Low-Rank Mamba
Another key strategy is the low-rank approximation in
the Mamba mixers. This reduces complexity and energy
usage during training while maintaining model performance
by factoring each dim × dim weight into dim × rank and
rank × dim. By reducing the rank from dim/2, where dim
stands for the matrix dimension, we can ensure the reduction
in computations. However, the rank layers are such a small
fraction of the overall architecture, that changing ranks does
not materially affect the total parameter count. But at runtime, the larger rank requires more FLOPs (more multiplications/additions), so it draws more power under load. Therefore,
rank mostly impacts computation rather than overall parameter
storage. As a result, to reduce the energy usage and the number
of parameters between layers, a low-rank approximation is
applied.
In this work, we fine-tune these two hyperparameters: the
distillation weight α and the rank used in low-rank approximation. These parameters are adjusted based on experimental
evaluations to achieve an optimal trade-off between efficiency
and performance.

L = αL1 (ystudent , yteacher ) + (1 − α)L1 (ystudent , yGT ) (7)

V. E XPERIMENTAL R ESULT
In this section, we begin by presenting the experimental
setup, which includes details about the dataset and the implementation. Then, we evaluate the proposed LightMambaSR
model, focusing on its size, performance, and power consumption in comparison to state-of-the-art methods.

By assigning a proper value for α, each of the two loss terms
is weighted to optimize the trade-off between performance and
model size.

A. Experimental Setup
Datasets. In this work, we used the DF2K (DIV2K +
Flickr2K) [45] dataset, which consists of 3450 high-resolution

images and their corresponding low-resolution versions. The
low-resolution images are generated by downscaling each
image by factors of 2, 3, and 4. To train the proposed model,
we consider a scale of 4 to do the experiments as it presents
a more challenging problem and requires more parameters to
learn. Moreover, for the validation set, a subset of the DIV2K
dataset consisting of 100 images was used. For testing the
accuracy and performance of the proposed approach, we utilized four standard benchmark datasets: Set5 [46], Set14 [47],
BSD100 [48], and Urban100 [49].
Implementation Details. For faster processing during training, images are cropped into smaller patches. Specifically,
from each LR image eight mini-patches of 64 × 64 and
from each HR image eight corresponding mini-patches of
256 × 256 are extracted randomly. To further preprocess the
data, random horizontal and vertical flips and rotations are
applied. The model is trained using the Adam optimizer. The
batch size is set to 128 and the training process takes 2500
iterations. The initial learning rate is set at 2 × 10−4 and is
halved when the training iteration reaches specific milestones.
For the embedding dimension of images, it is considered to
be 60 to reduce the model size. For evaluation, we calculate
PSNR and SSIM metrics on the Y channel in the YCbCr color
space. All training experiments are conducted on Lambda GPU
Server [50], which utilizes NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4090 GPU.
Experiments are conducted with various reduced matrix
ranks including ranks 30 and 2. To further reduce the model
size, knowledge distillation is applied, the same process as
DVMSR [30], but with different values and hyperparameters.
For this purpose, the embedding dimension is reduced to 32.
To assess the performance of different values of α parameter
in knowledge distillation, an experiment was conducted comparing the result of changing this value over 1000 iterations
for each of the teacher and student models.
For the inference power consumption measurements, we
deploy the model on the embedded Nvidia Jetson Orin Nano
board [34] as shown in Figure 3.(a). Power measurements
experiments are repeated over 1000 samples, and the average is
calculated. The Jetson Orin Nano Developer Kit with 8GB of
memory features a hexa-core ARM Cortex-A78AE CPU with
1.5 GHz frequency and a 512-core NVIDIA Ampere GPU with
625 MHz. This board is optimized for AI tasks like matrix
multiplications and deep learning inference, making it ideal
for edge AI applications [51], besides boards such as Jetson
Orin Nano [52]. We converted the software models to ONNX
format and optimized them into TensorRT representations for
GPU-accelerated inference. The frequency was set to 612 MHz
with the power mode being set to 7 Watt. During inference,
the tegrastats utility [53] was used to measure instantaneous
power.
B. Results
In this section, we compare the proposed MambaLiteSR
model with the state-of-the-art methods, including eSR [25],
ESPCN [37], and FSRCNN [54], in terms of performance and
power consumption. While ESPCN and FSRCNN were not

Fig. 3. (a) For measuring dynamic power on the embedded NVIDIA Jetson
Orin Nano, the student onnx model is converted to TensorRT format and then
the measurement starts. (b) The plot shows the instantaneous power usage
over time for 1000 samples, extracted using the tegrastats utility [53].

originally designed for edge deployment, they were evaluated
on edge devices in the experiments conducted in eSR. Next, we
present the model optimization and training results to analyze
the impact of various variables of knowledge distillation
and Mamba architecture on training and overall performance.
Moreover, we compare the proposed MambaLiteSR with the
baseline [30]. Finally, we demonstrate the performance of the
proposed tiny student model by comparing the model output
with the ground truth image to demonstrate its ability to
achieve similar quality.
Figure 3.(b) illustrates the power consumption results on
the embedded NVIDIA Jetson Orin Nano during inference.
Experiments are done on the proposed MambaLiteSR tiny
student model to evaluate the power and PSNR/SSIM results, as summarized in Table I. The idle power consumption was measured at approximately 0.9 W, and then, the
system initiated image pre-processing. Following this, the
model execution and image input processing caused a 3.3×
increase in power consumption. The deployment results of
the proposed MambaLiteSR model, compared against stateof-the-art methods on edge devices, are detailed in Table I.
The power measurement was averaged over 1000 samples,
resulting in a fast single image latency of 14 ms. The results
demonstrate that the proposed approach improved the power
consumption by up to 58% while maintaining SSIM and
PSNR performance comparable to existing methods. Note
that the compared methods are all CNN-based. While CNNs

TABLE I
C OMPARISON OF IMAGE QUALITY AND PERFORMANCE METRICS OF M AMBA L ITE SR TO EXISTING METHODS IMPLEMENTED ON THE EDGE DEVICE
J ETSON AGX X AVIER GPU [55]. M AMBA L ITE SR IMPROVES THE POWER CONSUMPTION BY UP TO 58% TO IMPLEMENT WHILE PERFORMING
SIMILARLY. T HE VALUE OF THE POWER OF THE PROPOSED APPROACH IS SPECIFIC TO THE EMBEDDED NVIDIA J ETSON O RIN DEVICE . T HE REPORTED
POWER IS THE AVERAGE OF 1000 SAMPLES . E XPERIMENTS WERE CONDUCTED ON A SCALE OF 4.

Algorithm
eSR [12]
eSR - fast [12]
ESPCN [37]
FSRCNN [54]
MambaLiteSR (Ours)

Power
[mWatts]
7100
3867
6952
4795
2957

Set5
PSNR SSIM
30.62
0.860
28.64
0.806
30.57
0.858
30.16
0.845
28.28
0.837

Set14
PSNR SSIM
27.48
0.751
26.12
0.712
27.50
0.752
27.19
0.742
25.39
0.727

BSDS100
PSNR SSIM
26.93
0.714
26.13
0.684
26.92
0.715
26.74
0.707
25.20
0.693

Urban100
PSNR SSIM
24.42
0.718
23.28
0.668
24.42
0.718
24.09
0.702
22.57
0.686

extract structured features, generative AI models such as ours
can create more detailed and realistic images by generating
missing information. Such models handle complex transformations better, especially for large scaling factors, and produce
sharper textures by learning perceptual features instead of just
minimizing pixel differences.
To reduce the number of parameters to make the model
suitable for edge deployment the embedding dimension of 60
and 32 to the teacher and student model is applied respectively,
which leads to the 15% reduction in the number of parameters
while keeping the performance acceptable with comparison
with the Baseline [30]. The proposed LightMambaSR includes
370k parameters with a PSNR of 28.28 while the baseline has
a 424k parameters with a PSNR of 32.19. There is a difference
in PSNRs, which due to the increasing trend of the training
we expect to achieve the same baseline PSNR as they did the
experiments for 500K iterations as shown in Table II.

in the loss function. Therefore, experiments were made with
different values of α to evaluate their performance over 1000
iterations and choose the most appropriate one. The result
of different values of α can be seen in table IV with their
corresponding PSNR.

TABLE II
C OMPARISON OF THE NUMBER OF PARAMETERS AND PSNR USAGE FOR
THE BASELINE AND M AMBA L ITE SR AT A SCALE FACTOR OF 4. T HE
PSNR RESULTS ARE EVALUATED ON THE S ET 5 DATASET.

TABLE IV
C OMPARISON OF PSNR FOR DIFFERENT α VALUES . T HE REPORTED
PSNR BELONGS TO THE STUDENT MODEL ON THE VALIDATION SET OVER
1000 ITERATIONS .

Model
DVMSR [30]
MambaLiteSR

Parameters
424k
370k (15% smaller)

iterations
500,000
2500

PSNR
32.19
28.28

Table III presents the rank configurations of MambaLiteSR
along with their results. It can be seen that there is a negligible
difference between the PSNRs of rank = 2 and rank = 30.
As a result, rank = 2 is chosen to allow for 1.7x less energy
consumption besides good performance.
The performance of different values of rank can be seen in
Figure 4, which shows the validation results during teacher
model training for rank values of 2 and 30, along with the
moving average of their corresponding GPU power usage
during training on the Lambda GPU Server [50], with all other
settings kept the same. While both models demonstrate similar
training behavior and performance, the model with the lower
rank demonstrates more efficient training; when rank = 2,
GPU power usage is 42% less than the one with rank = 30.
To further reduce the model size, knowledge distillation is
applied. According to the Equation 7, α is a key parameter

TABLE III
C OMPARISON OF PSNR AND POWER USAGE FOR DIFFERENT RANKS AT A
SCALE FACTOR OF 4. C ONFIGS 1 AND 2 USE THE SAME CONFIGURATION ,
VARYING ONLY IN RANK AND BELONGING TO THE TEACHER MODEL . I T
CAN BE SEEN THAT THE LOWER - RANK MODEL CONSUMES AROUND 42%
LESS POWER THAN THE HIGHER - RANK MODEL . T HE REPORTED POWER
MEASUREMENTS ARE AVERAGED VALUES OBTAINED DURING THE
TRAINING OF THE TEACHER MODEL ON THE L AMBDA GPU S ERVER , AND
THE PSNR RESULTS ARE EVALUATED ON THE VALIDATION DATASET.

Config.
Config 1
Config 2

Rank
30
2

α
PSNR

Parameters
370k
370k

0.2
28.71

iterations
1500
1500

0.4
26.35

0.6
26.69

PSNR
28.88
28.81

Power (W)
103
60 (1.7x less)

0.8
27.95

As a result, α = 0.8 is chosen to enable both learning from
the teacher and ground truth labels. After that, the student
model is put to training for 2500 number of iterations, the same
as the teacher model. Then, the experiments on α values and
their corresponding PSNRs inspected more with a wider range
of values because of the probable formulation it suggested.
Figure 5 demonstrates model performance on the validation
set with changes in α, suggesting a potential inconsistency in
gradient values between the learned teacher and the ground
truth, as indicated in the Equation 7, meaning that whenever
the teacher and ground truth have near to similar weights in the
loss function, PSNR might degrade. Moreover, if one of these
weights decreases significantly, it indicates that the model is
either not effectively learning or has reverted to learning from
scratch. Note that in the baseline, α was set to 0.5, meaning
the impact of the teacher model and ground truth is the same,
which as was mentioned, results in inferior performance.

Fig. 4. Comparison between MambaLiteSR teacher model training when rank = 2 and rank = 30 over 1500 iterations: (a) depicts the validation PSNR.
(b) depicts the moving average of GPU power usage every 100 seconds with a window size of 100. At runtime, the larger rank requires more FLOPs, drawing
more power under load. The training outcome and model performance act similar because, as indicated by Equation 5, the matrix ultimately remains the
same. The reported power measurements correspond to the NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4090 on Lambda GPU Server [50] using wandb [56] dashboard.

Fig. 5. Model performance on the validations set based on the changes in α,
suggesting a potential inconsistency in gradient values between the learned
teacher and the ground truth. The reported PSNRs are after 1000 iterations
of training for teacher and student models.

Figure 6 demonstrates the preprocessed input image, the
corresponding MambaLiteSR output, and the ground truth
image. The same process for a random patch is shown as well
for better visualization; a random patch from the LR image is
taken, was given as an input to the model, and the output as
well as the ground truth is shown. A complete process consists
of dividing the LR image into patches, passing each of them
through the model, and stitching these patches together. It can
be seen that MambaLiteSR is successful in generating a superresolution image similar to its ground truth image.
VI. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we presented MambaLiteSR, a new image
super-resolution model designed for edge devices. It combines a low-rank Mamba mixer with knowledge distillation
to deliver outputs with super-resolution, relying on state space
representations while checking the embedding dimension and
rank settings to minimize parameters and computation, as well
as the distillation parameter tuning for better performance.
By integrating knowledge distillation, MambaLiteSR inherits
the performance of a larger teacher model and achieves

Fig. 6. Demonstration of LR image, MambaLiteSR output, and ground
truth image, as well as a random patch cropped from the LR input and its
corresponding MambaLiteSR output and ground truth patch.

competitive PSNR and SSIM on standard benchmarks. Our
experiments show that MambaLiteSR can reduce the model
size by up to 15% compared to a baseline without sacrificing
reconstruction quality significantly. Changes in rank resulted in
a 42% reduction in power usage during training. Assessment
of the distillation parameter led us to a realization between
the teacher model and ground truth, resulting in a balanced
knowledge distillation. We also demonstrated its real-time
capability on the embedded NVIDIA Jetson Orin Nano, which
maintains lower power consumption compared to the stateof-the-art edge super-resolution models, while maintaining
similar performance. By combining low-rank approximation,
knowledge distillation, and efficient embedding strategies,
MambaLiteSR offers a practical solution for generative AI
applications on edge devices.
VII. ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This project was sponsored by the U.S. Army Research
Laboratory.

R EFERENCES
[1] S. Feuerriegel, J. Hartmann, C. Janiesch, and P. Zschech, Generative AI.
Springer, 2023.
[2] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar et al., “Attention is all you need,”
in NeurIPS, 2017.
[3] B. Prakash, T. Oates, and T. Mohsenin, “Using llms for augmenting
hierarchical agents with common sense priors,” in International FLAIRS
Conference Proceedings, vol. 37, 2024.
[4] M. Yu, S. J., X. C. et al., “A review of single image super-resolution
reconstruction based on deep learning,” in Springer, 2023.
[5] H. Pourmehrani, J. Bahrami et al., “Fat-rabbit: Fault-aware training towards robustness against bit-flip based attacks in deep neural networks,”
in 2024 IEEE International Test Conference (ITC), 2024.
[6] U. Kallakuri, E. Humes, and T. Mohsenin, “Resource-aware saliencyguided differentiable pruning for deep neural networks,” in Proceedings
of the Great Lakes Symposium on VLSI, 2024.
[7] M. Navardi, E. Humes, and T. Mohsenin, “Metatinyml: End-to-end
metareasoning framework for tinyml platforms,” IEEE Embedded Systems Letters, 2024.
[8] H. Rashid and T. Mohsenin, “Tinym2 net-v3: Memory-aware compressed multimodal deep neural networks for sustainable edge deployment,” https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.12353, 2024, arXiv:2405.12353.
[9] Z. Bao, E. Kanjo, S. Banerjee, H. Rashid, and T. Mohsenin, “Decentralised resource sharing in tinyml: Wireless bilayer gossip parallel
sgd for collaborative learning,” https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.04817, 2025,
arXiv:2501.04817.
[10] T. Manjunath, M. Navardi, P. Dixit, and T. Mohsenin, “Reprohrl:
Towards multi-goal navigation in the real world using hierarchical
agents,” https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.08737, 2023, arXiv:2308.08737.
[11] M. Navardi and T. Mohsenin, “Mlae2: Metareasoning for latency-aware
energy-efficient autonomous nano-drones,” in 2023 IEEE International
Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS), 2023.
[12] P. Navarrete Michelini, Y. Lu, and X. Jiang, “Edge-sr: Super-resolution
for the masses,” in WACV, 2022.
[13] Q. Wang et al., “An intelligent co-scheduling framework for efficient
super-resolution on edge platforms,” IEEE IoT Journal, 2024.
[14] A. Mazumder, F. Safavi, M. Rahnemoonfar, and T. Mohsenin, “Regtune: A regression-focused fine-tuning approach for profiling low energy
consumption and latency,” IEEE IoT Journal, 2024.
[15] M. Navardi, E. Humes, T. Manjunath, and T. Mohsenin, “Metae2rl:
Toward meta-reasoning for energy-efficient multigoal reinforcement
learning with squeezed-edge you only look once,” IEEE Micro, 2023.
[16] E. Humes, M. Navardi, and T. Mohsenin, “Squeezed edge yolo: Onboard
object detection on edge devices,” in NeurIPS, 2023.
[17] J. Wright, A. Y. Yang, A. Ganesh, S. S. Sastry, and Y. Ma, “Robust face
recognition via sparse representation,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 2009.
[18] C. Dong, C. C. Loy, K. He, and X. Tang, “Image super-resolution using
deep convolutional networks,” in ECCV, 2014.
[19] J. Kim, J. K. Lee, and K. M. Lee, “Accurate image super-resolution
using very deep convolutional networks,” in CVPR, 2016.
[20] C. Dong, C. C. Loy, and X. Tang, “Accelerating the super-resolution
convolutional neural network,” in ECCV, 2016.
[21] Y. Zhang, K. Li, K. Li et al., “Image super-resolution using very deep
residual channel attention networks,” in CVPR, 2018.
[22] B. Lim, S. Son, H. Kim, S. Nah, and K. M. Lee, “Enhanced deep residual
networks for single image super-resolution,” in CVPR Workshops, 2017.
[23] K. Zhang, W. Zuo, S. Gu, and L. Zhang, “Learning deep cnn denoiser
prior for image restoration,” in CVPR, 2017.
[24] W. Zhang, L. Pan, K. Xu, G. Li, and Y. Lv, “Efficient self-calibrated
and hierarchical refinement network for lightweight super-resolution,”
Elsevier, 2024.
[25] Z. He, S. Zhang et al., “Esr-ddln: Enhanced single image superresolution via dual-domain learning network,” in ICME, 2024.
[26] Y. Zhang, X. Lin, H. Yang et al., “A multi-attention feature distillation
neural network for lightweight single image super-resolution,” International Journal of Intelligent Systems, 2024.
[27] A. Gu and T. Dao, “Mamba: Linear-time sequence modeling
with selective state spaces,” https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.00752, 2023,
arXiv:2312.00752.
[28] L. Zhu, B. Liao, Q. Zhang, X. Wang, W. Liu, and X. Wang, “Vision
mamba: Efficient visual representation learning with bidirectional state
space model,” in ICML, 2024.

[29] A. Hatamizadeh and J. Kautz, “Mambavision: A hybrid mambatransformer vision backbone,” https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.08083, 2024,
arXiv:2407.08083.
[30] X. Lei, W. Zhang, and W. Cao, “Dvmsr: Distillated vision mamba for
efficient super-resolution,” in ICCV, 2024.
[31] J. Qiao, J. Liao, W. Li, Y. Zhang, Y. Guo, Y. Wen, Z. Qiu, J. Xie, J. Hu,
and S. Lin, “Hi-mamba: Hierarchical mamba for efficient image superresolution,” https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.10140, 2024, arXiv:2410.10140.
[32] C. Liu, D. Zhang, G. Lu, W. Yin, J. Wang, and G. Luo, “Srmambat: Exploring the hybrid mamba-transformer network for single image
super-resolution,” Elsevier, 2025.
[33] E. J. Hu, Y. Shen, P. Wallis, Z. Allen-Zhu, Y. Li, S. Wang, L. Wang,
and W. Chen, “Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models,”
in ICLR, 2022.
[34] “Nvidia
jetson
orin,”
https://www.nvidia.com/en-us/
autonomous-machines/embedded-systems/jetson-orin/,
accessed:
2024.
[35] M. Jahnavia, D. R. Raob, and A. Sujathac, “A comparative study of
super-resolution interpolation techniques: Insights for selecting the most
appropriate method,” in International Conference on Innovative Data
Communication Technologies and Application, 2024.
[36] Y. Chen and T. Pock, “Trainable nonlinear reaction diffusion: A flexible
framework for fast and effective image restoration,” https://arxiv.org/abs/
1508.02848, 2015, arXiv:1508.02848.
[37] W. Shi et al., “Real-time single image and video super-resolution using
an efficient sub-pixel convolutional neural network,” in CVPR, 2016.
[38] F. Kong, M. Li, S. Liu, D. Liu, J. He, Y. Bai, F. Chen, and L. Fu,
“Residual local feature network for efficient super-resolution,” in CVPR,
2022.
[39] Y. Li, Y. Zhang et al., “Ntire 2023 challenge on efficient superresolution: Methods and results,” in CVPR Workshops, 2023.
[40] L. Zhu, B. Liao, Q. Zhang, X. Wang, W. Liu, and X. Wang, “Vision
mamba: Efficient visual representation learning with bidirectional state
space model,” 2024, arXiv:2401.09417.
[41] P. Mathur et al., “A real-time super-resolution for surveillance thermal
cameras using optimized pipeline on embedded edge device,” IEEE
AVSS, 2021.
[42] F. Perez-Montes, J. Olivares-Mercado, and G. Sanchez-Perez, “An
efficient facial verification system for surveillance that automatically
selects a lightweight cnn method and utilizes super-resolution images,”
in MICAI, 2023.
[43] R. Y. Tsai and T. S. Huang, “Multiframe image restoration and registration,” in Advances in Computer Vision and Image Processing, 1984.
[44] S. Baker and T. Kanade, “Limits on super-resolution and how to break
them,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence,
2002.
[45] R. Timofte et al., “Ntire 2017 challenge on single image superresolution: Methods and results,” in CVPR Workshops, 2017.
[46] M. Bevilacqua, A. Roumy, C. Guillemot, and M. Alberi-Morel, “Lowcomplexity single-image super-resolution based on nonnegative neighbor
embedding,” in BMVC, 2012.
[47] R. Zeyde, M. Elad, and M. Protter, “On single image scale-up using
sparse-representations,” in Curves and Surfaces, 2010.
[48] D. R. Martin, C. C. Fowlkes, D. Tal, and J. Malik, “A database of human
segmented natural images and its application to evaluating segmentation
algorithms and measuring ecological statistics,” in ICCV, 2001.
[49] J. Huang, A. Singh, and N. Ahuja, “Single image super-resolution from
transformed self-exemplars,” in CVPR, 2015.
[50] “Lambda gpu server,” https://lambdalabs.com/, accessed: 2024.
[51] M. R. Shaharear, A. N. Mazumder, and T. Mohsenin, “Vit-reg:
Regression-focused hardware-aware fine-tuning for vit on tinyml platforms,” IEEE Design & Test, 2024.
[52] “Jetson orin nano super developer kit,” https://www.nvidia.
com/en-us/autonomous-machines/embedded-systems/jetson-orin/
nano-super-developer-kit/, accessed: 2024.
[53] “Tegrastats
utility,”
https://docs.nvidia.com/jetson/archives/
r34.1/DeveloperGuide/text/AT/JetsonLinuxDevelopmentTools/
TegrastatsUtility.html, accessed: 2024.
[54] C. Dong, C. Change Loy, and X. Tang, “Accelerating the super–resolution convolutional neural network,” in ECCV, 2016.
[55] “Nvidia jetson agx xavier gpu,” https://www.nvidia.com/en-us/
autonomous-machines/embedded-systems/jetson-agx-xavier/, accessed:
2024.
[56] “Weights & biases,” https://wandb.ai/, accessed: 2024.

