IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

4401117

CFFormer: A Cross-Fusion Transformer Framework
for the Semantic Segmentation of Multisource
Remote Sensing Images
Jinqi Zhao , Member, IEEE, Ming Zhang , Zhonghuai Zhou, Zixuan Wang , Graduate Student Member, IEEE,
Fengkai Lang , Hongtao Shi , Member, IEEE, and Nanshan Zheng , Member, IEEE

Abstract— Multisource remote sensing images (RSIs) can
capture the complementary information of ground objects for use
in semantic segmentation. However, there can be inconsistency
and interference noise among the multimodal data from different
sensors. Therefore, it is a challenge to effectively reduce the
differences and noise between the different modalities and
fully utilize their complementary features. In this article,
we propose a universal cross-fusion transformer framework
(CFFormer) for the semantic segmentation of multisource
RSIs, adopting a parallel dual-stream structure to extract
features separately from the different modalities. We introduce
a feature correction module (FCM) that corrects the features
of the current modality by combining features from the
other modalities in both the spatial and channel dimensions.
In the feature fusion module (FFM), we employ a multihead
cross-attention mechanism to interact globally and fuse features
from the different modalities, enabling the comprehensive
utilization of the complementary information in multisource
RSIs. Finally, comparative experiments demonstrate that the
proposed CFFormer framework not only achieves state-of-theart (SOTA) accuracy but also exhibits outstanding robustness
when compared to the current advanced networks for semantic
segmentation of multisource RSIs. Specifically, CFFormer
achieves a mean intersection over union (mIoU) of 58% and
an overall accuracy (OA) of 85.35% on the WHU-OPT-SAR
dataset, outperforming the second-ranked network by 4.71% and
1.74%, respectively. On the Vaihingen and Potsdam datasets,
CFFormer also achieves the best results, with mIoU and OA
values of 84.31%/91.88% and 88.62%/92.64%, respectively. The
source code is available at https://github.com/masurq/CFFormer.
Index Terms— Feature correction module (FCM), feature
fusion module (FFM), multisource remote sensing images (RSIs),
semantic segmentation, vision transformer.

Received 26 October 2024; accepted 20 November 2024. Date of publication
9 December 2024; date of current version 7 January 2025. This work was
supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under
Grant 42301412, Grant U22A20569, Grant 41977220, and Grant 41901286; in
part by the Key Laboratory of National Geographic Census and Monitoring,
Ministry of Natural Resources, under Grant 2023NGCM12; in part by the
Open Research Fund Program of LIESMARS under Grant 22R05; in part
by the Xinjiang Key Research and Development Special Task under Grant
2022B03003-4; and in part by the Jiangsu Provincial Double-Innovation
Doctor Program under Grant JSSCBS20221531. (Corresponding author:
Fengkai Lang.)
The authors are with the School of Environment and Spatial
Informatics, China University of Mining and Technology, Xuzhou, Jiangsu
221116, China (e-mail: masurq@cumt.edu.cn; zhangmingz126@126.com;
TS23160209P31@cumt.edu.cn; TS23160038A31@cumt.edu.cn; langfk@
cumt.edu.cn; hongtao.shi@cumt.edu.cn; znshcumt@163.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TGRS.2024.3507274

I. I NTRODUCTION

S

EMANTIC segmentation of remote sensing images (RSIs)
provides support for various RSI application scenarios,
such as land-cover classification [1], [2], [3] land planning [4],
urban planning [5], [6], [7], and road extraction [8], [9],
and has thus become a research hotspot in the field of
remote sensing data processing. Among the different data
sources, optical RSIs have been the most widely applied,
due to their high spatial resolution, rich spectral information,
ease of interpretation and understanding, and relatively low
acquisition costs. However, as remote sensing technology
continues to develop, optical images present challenges in
semantic segmentation tasks in complex scenes. For example,
optical RSIs are plagued by clouds or adverse weather,
which greatly reduces the segmentation accuracy [10]. As a
result, it has been found that individual remote sensing data
sources are usually insufficient to meet the requirements of
the different tasks [11].
As the acquisition of multisource remote sensing data
becomes increasingly accessible [12], [13], the comprehensive
utilization of the complementary information from optical
images and other modal images has become one of
the solutions to this problem [14]. For example, digital
surface models (DSMs) can provide elevation information
for objects on the Earth’s surface [15], while synthetic
aperture radar (SAR) can offer rich amplitude and phase
geometric information independent of illumination and
weather conditions [16], [17], [18]. Furthermore, some objects
may display comparable interclass appearances in spectral
information, as depicted in Fig. 1(a), where patches of villages
and cities are challenging to distinguish in optical images
while they are distinctly discernible in SAR images. A similar
situation can be observed in Fig. 1(b), where trees and
low vegetation appear similar in the optical images, but the
distinction between them is evident in the DSM images,
due to their elevation differences. Therefore, leveraging the
complementary information from multisource RSIs to address
the constraints of single-source images and enhance the
stability and robustness of segmentation is an important
research topic.
With the continuous rise of deep learning, research on
the semantic segmentation of multisource RSIs based on

1558-0644 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

4401117

Fig. 1.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

Examples of the complementarity between RSIs.

this technology has gained more and more attention. The
early deep learning methods typically extracted pixel values
from the different modalities directly and input them into a
multilayer perceptron (MLP) for pixel-level classification. The
final prediction results were then obtained by aggregating the
classification results [19], [20], [21]. Although these methods
are more powerful than the traditional feature engineering
techniques, they overlook the contextual relationships of
the spatial regions around pixels. To tackle this issue,
subsequent deep learning methods introduced convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) [22], [23]. These methods extract
features from local regions of the image via the CNN and
employ sophisticated feature fusion strategies to integrate
the complementary information between different modalities,
thereby enhancing the accuracy of the models. For instance,
V_FuseNet [24] explores the classification performance
of optical and DSM data under early fusion and late
fusion; the dense connection and fully convolutional network
(DFCN) [25] uses DSM data as supplementary information,
incorporating a multimodal network combining the ideas
of dense connections and a fully convolutional network
(FCN), and widening the network using multiscale filters;
and the dense-attention-similarity-fusion network (DASFNet)
[26] employs cosine similarity along with a gating mechanism
to fuse infrared-red-green optical data and DSM data and
take advantage of the complementarity of each data source.
Using optical data and SAR data, MBFNet [27] establishes
the second-order association between optical features and SAR
features through bilinear pooling operations; multimodal-cross
attention network (MCANet) was proposed [10] based on a
cross-attention mechanism and an open-source optical-SAR
land-use classification dataset; and the cross fusion network
(CFNet) [28] introduces a cross-gate module with bidirectional information flow to fully exploit the complementary
information from different modalities. However, these methods
only use a relatively simple global multimodal interaction
strategy, and cannot be well generalized to different modal
combinations.
In addition, the constraints inherent in the convolutional operations of CNNs have made it progressively
difficult to achieve substantial advancements. Consequently,
a growing number of researchers are turning their focus
to transformer-based approaches. These methods harness
innovative frameworks to bolster interpretive precision. The
transformer architecture [29] is a more powerful global
feature extraction network. It converts the 2-D image-based

task into a 1-D sequence-based task and extracts the global
contextual information through the advantage of a selfattention mechanism, achieving state-of-the-art (SOTA) results
in basic visual tasks such as object detection [30], image
classification [31], and semantic segmentation [32]. Driven by
this, many researchers in the remote sensing community have
applied the transformer architecture to semantic segmentation
tasks in single-source RSIs [33], [34], [35], [36]. However, for
multisource RSIs, most of the semantic segmentation networks
are still based on CNN architectures, and these convolutional
filters struggle to establish long-range correlations in pixelrich multimodal images, limiting the performance of the
models. Moreover, due to the differences between the various
remote sensing sensor modalities, there is often significant
inconsistency in the representation of multimodal data [37],
[38]. Meanwhile, different types of noise can also lead
to mutual interference between multimodal data. In this
regard, one can leverage the transformer’s capability to model
long-range correlations to implement a global multimodal
interaction strategy, so as to better mine the potential of
cross-modal complementary features.
In this article, to address the challenge of insufficient
utilization of complementary information in multimodal data
and the difficulty in establishing long-range correlations
between multimodal images using CNN, we propose a novel
cross-fusion transformer framework (CFFormer), aiming to
perform semantic segmentation by jointly leveraging optical
remote sensing data and other multimodal remote sensing data
(e.g., SAR or DSM data). CFFormer employs a dual-stream
architecture based on a transformer model to extract features
from the optical modality and other modalities separately.
To fully exploit the extracted multimodal features, we have
designed a feature correction module (FCM) and a feature
fusion module (FFM). The FCM corrects the local spatial
features and global semantic features of each modality by
using the spatial and channel correlations between different
modalities. This correction aims to alleviate the differences
and interference noise between the two modalities, directing
their attention toward each other’s complementary information. The FFM further enhances and fuses the two sets of
corrected modal features. By embedding the newly developed
efficient cross-attention mechanism, the FFM captures the
interactions between different modalities at a global scale,
contributing to the full utilization of the complementary
information from multimodal data. The highlights of this
article are as follows.
1) CFFormer is proposed as a multimodal framework for
the semantic segmentation of RSIs, which interacts and fuses
the information of multisource RSIs from the perspectives of
feature map sequences through the FCM and FFM.
2) An efficient multihead cross-attention mechanism based
on a self-attention mechanism is proposed. It aims to fully
capture the complex interactions between different modalities.
Moreover, introducing additional convolutions reduces the
computational complexity and memory requirement.
3) An efficient FCM is proposed to adaptively refine and
filter out discrepancies and noise interference between various
modalities through spatial and channel correlations of different

ZHAO et al.: CFFormer FOR THE SEMANTIC SEGMENTATION OF MULTISOURCE REMOTE SENSING IMAGES

Fig. 2.
CFFormer framework. The input to our model consists of two
branches, one with an optical image and the other with an SAR or DSM
image. After passing through the four-layer encoder of Biformer, the output
of each layer in the dual-branch is processed by the FCM module for feature
correction and the FFM module for feature fusion. The output of the encoder
is upsampled by the decoder to generate a segmentation map.

modalities. Our FCM has enhanced the extraction and fusion
of multimodal features by using cross-modal complementary
information.
4) Through extensive experimentation with multimodal
datasets (ISPRS Vaihingen, Potsdam, and WHU-OPT-SAR),
the proposed framework has been shown to be highly capable
of semantic segmentation of not only optical and SAR but also
optical and DSM data.
The remainder of this article is structured as follows.
Section II presents the overall framework of CFFormer,
with a full description of each component. The extensive
experimental results and thorough analyses are provided in
Section III. In Section III-C, the effectiveness and principles
of the proposed method are discussed through visualization.
Finally, Section IV provides a summary of our work and
possible directions for future research.
II. M ETHODOLOGY
A. Proposed CFFormer Framework
We propose a novel network framework based on a
transformer model, which uses the FCM and FFM to facilitate
the fusion of heterogeneous data sources and achieve more
accurate semantic segmentation. The algorithmic framework of
this article is shown in Fig. 2. In detail, the proposed approach
relies on the classical encoder–decoder architecture, where
the encoder incorporates feature extraction networks without
weight sharing: the FCM for filtering diverse modal noise
and differences, and the FFM for enhancing the information
interaction and fusion. The decoder part aggregates the
multiscale features to generate the final result. Other common
methods such as ResNet can be employed as an alternative for
the feature extraction network.
B. Encoder
The encoder comprises three components: feature extraction, feature correction, and feature fusion. Two pretrained
transformer-based BiFormer networks [39] are used as the

4401117

backbones, extracting features from the multimodal remote
sensing data in a parallel manner. BiFormer is composed of
four stages, each of which downsamples the feature maps
by a factor of 2. In the subsequent correction and fusion
processes, we make full use of the downsampled features in
each stage to better capture information in the image through
the acquired multilevel and multiscale feature representations.
The FCM comprises spatial-wise and channel-wise feature
corrections, leveraging the correlations between the different
modalities in both the spatial and channel dimensions to
rectify their respective feature information. The FFM further
deepens and fuses the corrected multimodal features through a
cross-attention mechanism, globally enhancing the information
interaction between each pixel. The details of each module are
as follow:
1) Feature Correction Module: Due to the differences in the
physical principles and measurement methods of the different
sensors in data acquisition, different modalities often show
significant appearance disparities [37], [38], and are also
influenced by various types of noise. However, neighboring
regions in the scene will have spatial and geometric
consistency across the different modalities. Meanwhile, the
semantic structures within the scene will be preserved,
to some extent, in the different modalities, as exemplified by
buildings, which exhibit clear outlines in optical images, high
backscattering intensity in SAR images, and large elevation
values in DSM images. This spatial consistency and semantic
association enable information from the different modalities
to be locally spatially related and globally semantically
related. Therefore, we propose the FCM, which includes
spatial correction and channel correction. The FCM adaptively
corrects and filters the differences and interference noise
between the different modalities through spatial correlation
and channel correlation, which can focus more on the
complementary information between each modality, achieving
better multimodal feature extraction and fusion. The order of
the feature correction affects the accuracy of the proposed
model, as explained in Section III-D2. In this section, the order
of spatial-wise correction followed by channel-wise correction
is used to introduce the specific structure (see Fig. 3).
a) Spatial-wise feature correction: As shown in the
left part of Fig. 3, we denote an optical image as
OPTin ∈ R H ×W ×C and a corresponding SAR image as
SARin ∈ R H ×W ×C , where SAR can be replaced with
other complementary modalities such as DSM. We first
concatenate the different modalities and then perform layerby-layer nonlinear transformation and feature learning on the
concatenated data using an MLP layer to obtain a feature
map F S ∈ R H ×W ×2 . The MLP layer consists of two linear
layers and a rectified linear unit (ReLU) function, as specified
in (1) and (2). Next, the output range of F S is changed to
[0, 1] using the sigmoid function, and it is further split into
S
S
two spatial weight maps WOPT
∈ R H ×W and WSAR
∈ R H ×W ,
as shown in (3)
F S = MLP(2C, 2)(Concat(OPTin , SARin ))
(1)
MLP = Linear(Cmid , Cout )(ReLU(Linear(Cin , Cmid )(·))) (2)

S
S
WOPT
, WSAR
= Split σ F S
(3)

Authorized licensed use limited to: China Three Gorges University. Downloaded on April 08,2025 at 11:51:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4401117

where Linear(Cin , Cmid )(·) represents a linear layer with input
channel Cin and output channel Cmid ; ReLU(·) represents the
ReLU function; and σ (·) represents the sigmoid function.
The spatial-wise correction offset of the input OPTin is
obtained by element-wise multiplication of the acquired spatial
S
weight map WSAR
D with the corresponding input SARin .
This is then added to OPTin , resulting in the spatial-wise
S
correction feature map OPTcorr
. Furthermore, we introduce a
trainable parameter α (0 ≤ α ≤ 1) to control the dynamic
weighting of the relative importance of the spatial-wise
correction and channel-wise correction. During the model
training process, this parameter is automatically adjusted based
on the contributions of the two correction offsets to the
segmentation accuracy, so as to dynamically learn the optimal
fusion ratio for the two sets of correction features, which
enhances the adaptability and robustness of the model [40].
The correction process can be expressed through the following
equation:
(
S
S
OPTcorr
= OPTin + α · WSAR
· SARin
(4)
S
S
SARcorr = SARin + α · WOPT · OPTin
S
S
where OPTcorr
and SARcorr
represent the optical and SAR
S
feature maps after spatial-wise correction, respectively; WSAR
S
and WOPT represent the weights of the spatial-wise correction
offsets; and α is a learnable parameter in the spatial-wise
correction stage.
b) Channel-wise feature correction: After calibrating the
local information of the different modalities using the spatialwise FCM, we further introduce the channel-wise FCM for
global calibration. As shown in the right half of Fig. 3,
S
S
the features OPTcorr
and SARcorr
, which have undergone
spatial-wise feature correction, are first concatenated to
obtain XC ∈ R H ×W ×2C . For complex multimodal features,
a comprehensive pooling strategy is adopted, including
global average pooling [41] to capture the overall average
information, global max pooling [42] to capture the salient
feature information, and global standard deviation pooling to
focus on the feature variation and distribution information.
This combination of multiple pooling operations can provide a
more comprehensive and rich feature representation, enabling
the model to adapt to different types and distributions of data.
Subsequently, the global feature vectors obtained after these
three pooling operations are concatenated to form a feature
map YC of size R6C . Next, the MLP layers are applied to
obtain FC ∈ R2C , and a sigmoid activation function and
slicing operations are used to obtain the channel weight maps
WCOPT ∈ RC and WCSAR ∈ RC that contains the global feature
information. The above process can be summarized by the
following equation:
 C

S
S
, SARcorr
X = Concat OPTcorr




 YC = Concat Avg XC Max XC Std XC 

(5)

FC = MLP(6C, 2C) YC



 C
WOPT , WCSAR = Split σ FC

where the MLP is shown in (2) and contains two linear
layers and a ReLU activation function; Avg(·), Max(·), and
refer to global average pooling, global max pooling, and

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

global standard deviation pooling, respectively; and Std(·) is
a sigmoid function.
Similar to the spatial-wise feature correction, the
channel-wise feature correction can be expressed as follows:
(

S⇌C
S
S
OPTcorr
= OPTcorr
+ (1 − α) · WCSAR · SARcorr
S⇌C
S
S
SARcorr
= SARcorr
+ (1 − α) · WCOPT · OPTcorr

(6)

S
S
where OPTcorr
and SARcorr
refer to the optical and SAR
feature maps after spatial-wise correction, respectively;
S⇌C
S⇌C
OPTcorr
and SARcorr
represent the optical and SAR
feature maps after spatial-wise correction and channel-wise
correction, respectively; 1 − α denotes the learnable parameter
in the channel-wise correction stage, and α in (6) is the same
as in (4), controlling the relative importance of the spatial-wise
correction stage and the channel-wise correction stage;
WCSAR and WCOPT represent the weights of the channel-wise
correction offsets.
2) Feature Fusion Module: Making full use of the
complementarity between different source features is crucial
for multisource semantic segmentation, and the pivotal aspect
of this process involves effectively modeling the complex
interactions between the different modalities. Currently, deep
learning-based methods for multimodal information fusion are
typically classified into summation-based methods [24], [43],
concatenation-based methods [44], and those based on crossattention mechanisms [10]. However, the first two approaches
not only lead to feature redundancy, making the fusion results
prone to local optima and interference noise, but also fail to tap
into the complex interactions between the different modalities,
significantly reducing the algorithm performance [37]. The
methods based on cross-attention mechanisms can not only
alleviate this problem by selecting effective information
from the different modalities and eliminating redundancy,
but also enable global information interaction, which fully
captures the complex nonlinear relationships between different
modal data. However, this approach is usually complex and
computationally demanding.
To address the issues above, we propose the FFM module.
This module introduces a cross-attention module to select
valid information, realize global information interaction,
and fully capture the complex nonlinear relationship from
different modal data. In addition, we have introduced a
selectable parameter that allows the model to perform
operations at different scales. Specifically, we downsample
the input sequence, using an additional convolutional layer
to shorten the sequence length during processing. This can
fully capture the global context information and reduce
the computational cost, solve the information redundancy
caused by applying the multihead attention mechanism for
high-resolution feature maps, and enable the model to focus
on the important features better. We also implement a novel
multihead attention calculation method, which optimizes the
computational dimension by reordering the query-key-value
calculation order of the multihead attention mechanism,
thereby reducing the computational burden. The specific
structural design is illustrated in Fig. 4.

ZHAO et al.: CFFormer FOR THE SEMANTIC SEGMENTATION OF MULTISOURCE REMOTE SENSING IMAGES

Assuming that the postcorrection inputs for the two modalS⇌C
ities are denoted as OPTcorr
∈ R H ×W ×C and SARs⇌C
∈
corr
H ×W ×C
R
, they are first flattened into feature sequences of size
R N ×C , where N = H × W . Subsequently, a cross-attention
mechanism is employed for global information exchange
between the two feature sequences. The cross-attention
mechanism in the proposed framework is based on the classic
self-attention mechanism [29], with the calculation formula for
the self-attention mechanism as follows:


QKT
V
(7)
Attention(Q, K, V) = Softmax √
dhead
where O ∈ R N ×C , K ∈ R N ×C , andV ∈ R N ×M are
all generated from the input feature sequences through
linear layers, and N = H × W refers to the length
of the input sequences. C is the dimension of sequences
Q and K , while M is the dimension of sequence V. In the
proposed method, C is equal to M, and thus for notation
simplicity, only C is used. In addition, dhead represents the
dimension of the feature vectors in each attention head when
employing the multihead attention strategy. The computational
complexity of the process shown in (7) is O(N 2 ), which
increases quadratically with the length of the sequence.
However, for RSIs with large-scale characteristics, this
quadratic growth in computational complexity is intolerable.
To solve this problem, the sequence reduction method
proposed by Xie et al. [45] is employed. Downsampling
along the dimension of the sequence length by using a
convolution sliding along that dimension is achieved, resulting
in a smaller key vector K ∈ R(N /R)×C and value vector
V ∈ R(N /R)×C , where R represents the downsampling
factor. Consequently, the matrix multiplication complexity
is reduced from O(N 2 ) to O((N 2 /R)), which effectively
lowers the overall computational complexity and memory
usage. To extend the model’s expressive capacity and make
it more suitable for handling complex input relationships and
patterns, a multihead cross-attention mechanism is further
introduced. In detail, we first obtain vectors QiOPT ∈ R N ×dhead ,
KiOPT ∈ R(N /R)×dhead , ViOPT ∈ R(N /R)×dhead , QiSAR ∈ R N ×dhead ,
KiSAR ∈ R(N /R)×dhead , and ViSAR ∈ R(N /R)×dhead for each head
of the optical and SAR modalities, where i represents the
attention head (1 ≤ i ≤ heads, where heads is the number
of attention heads), and dhead represents the dimension of the
feature vectors in each attention head. The attention matrices
are then calculated for the optical and SAR modalities through
the following equation:

 i

QOPT KiSAR

i

√
, i = 1, 2, . . . , heads
 SOPT = Softmax
 i dheadi 
QSAR KOPT


 SiSAR = Softmax
√
.
dhead
(8)
The optical attention matrix SiOPT of each head is then
multiplied by the SAR matrix ViSAR of each head, to obtain
the amended optical feature maps of each head. Subsequently,
these amended optical feature maps of all the heads are
concatenated along the channel dimension, resulting in the
final amended optical feature map ZOPT ∈ R N ×C . Similarly,

4401117

the final amended SAR feature map ZSAR ∈ R N ×C can be
obtained in the same manner. The aforementioned process is
summarized by
(

ZOPT = Concat SiOPT × ViSAR

i = 1, 2, . . . , heads.
ZSAR = Concat SiSAR × ViOPT
(9)
Next, the shapes of the final amended feature maps
are transformed to R H ×W ×C and they are added to the
corresponding original input feature maps, resulting in
the interactively enhanced optical feature map and SAR
feature map. Finally, the two interactively enhanced modal
feature maps are concatenated and their information is
effectively fused through a method similar to the bottleneck
structure, alleviating the gradient vanishing problem [46]
caused by the network’s depth and obtaining the final fused
feature map Fuse ∈ R H ×W ×C . It is worth noting that
depth-wise convolutions are used to replace the normal
3 × 3 convolutions, maintaining module effectiveness while
reducing the parameter count.
C. Decoder
To maintain the efficiency of the model, the decoder is
implemented using only simple components. The specific
steps are as follows. First, the multilevel fusion features
FiEn (1 ≤ i ≤ 4) from the FFM are passed through the
linear layers to unify the output channel. The features are
then upsampled to 1/4 of the original size and concatenated
together to obtain Fup . Finally, the concatenated features
undergo processing through two 1 × 1 convolutional layers to
obtain FDe , which is upsampled to generate the final prediction
result P. The above steps can be formulated as shown in (10).
The model’s accuracy can be impacted by the quantity of the
branches, as detailed in Section III-D5


i

F̂ iEn = Linear(C
in , C) FEn








W
H
F
i
×
F̂ En
= Concat Upsample
up
4
4



FDe = Conv1×1 (C, Ccls ) Conv1×1 (4C, C) Fup




P
= Upsample(H × W )(FDe )
(10)
where Linear(Cin , Ccls )(·) and Conv1×1 (Cin , Ccls )(·) represent
a linear layer and a 1 × 1 convolutional layer with Cin and
Ccls as the input and output channels, respectively. Ccls is the
number of prediction classes. Upsample(H × W )(·)D refers to
upsampling the input feature to size R H ×W .
III. E XPERIMENTS
A. Dataset Description
1) WHU-OPT-SAR: This dataset was built by Wuhan
University and spans 51 448.56 km2 in Hubei province of
China [10]. It combines 100 pairs of optical images (RGBN,
where N is near-infrared) and SAR images with a size
of 5556 × 3704, as well as the corresponding pixel-level
labels. The SAR images were sourced from GaoFen-3 with a
sampling resolution of 5 m. The optical images sourced from

4401117

Fig. 3.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

FCM enhances multimodal feature extraction and fusion by adaptively correcting and filtering differences via spatial and channel correlation.

Fig. 4. FFM effectively extracts pertinent information across modalities for global interaction, comprehensively capturing the intricate nonlinear correlations
within multimodal data.

GaoFen-1 (sampling resolution of 2 m) were resampled to the
resolution of 5 m by bilinear interpolation. The WHU-OPTSAR dataset contains seven land-cover categories: farmland,
forest, city, village, water, road, and others. To facilitate
the model training and testing, we used 80 of the images
for training and 20 images for the testing, according to the
hold-out strategy in the original dataset [10]. During the
network design and debugging phase, we separated 20 images
from the training set as the validation set. Once the network
stabilized, all 80 images were used for the training. In the
data preprocessing, considering the limited GPU memory, all
the images were cropped into a set of subimages of size
512 × 512 without overlapping.
2) Vaihingen: The Vaihingen dataset [47] is a benchmark
dataset of RSIs supplied by the International Society for
Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing (ISPRS), which contains
six classes, namely, impervious surface, buildings, low
vegetation, trees, cars, and clutter/background. It includes
33 tiles with a spatial resolution of 9 cm, showcasing true
ortho photo (TOP) images that consist of the near-infrared,
red, and green (IRRG) bands. In the experiments, we also
used the normalized DSM of Gerke [48]. Following previous
studies [49], [50], we utilized samples with IDs 2, 4, 6, 8, 10,
12, 14, 16, 20, 22, 24, 27, 29, 31, 33, 35, and 38 for the testing,

while the remaining 16 samples were divided into training
and validation sets at different ratios in two different stages.
During the network design and debugging phase, samples with
IDs 1 and 13 were selected as the validation set, with the
remaining samples used as the training set. After the network
became stable, all 16 samples were used as the training
set, and no independent validation set was used. In the data
preprocessing, considering the limited GPU memory, each
image was overlap-partitioned into a set of subimages sized
256 × 256 with a step size of 128 × 128.
3) Potsdam: The Potsdam dataset [51] is another benchmark dataset of RSIs provided by the ISPRS, sharing category
information identical to the Vaihingen dataset. It includes
38 very fine spatial resolution TOP image tiles (5 cm), each
sized 6000 × 6000 pixels. The dataset provides four bands of
optical images (RGBN), along with a DSM and normalized
DSM. In the experiments, following previous studies [52]
and [53], we used 14 samples with IDs 2_13, 2_14, 3_13,
3_14, 4_13, 4_14, 4_15,5_13, 5_14, 5_15, 6_13, 6_14, 6_15,
and 7_13 for the testing, while the remaining 23 samples
(except ID 7_10 with wrong annotations) were adjusted in
two different phases. In the network design and debugging
phase, samples with IDs 2_11, 4_11, 6_9, and 6_11 were
incorporated into the validation set, and the remaining samples

ZHAO et al.: CFFormer FOR THE SEMANTIC SEGMENTATION OF MULTISOURCE REMOTE SENSING IMAGES

4401117

were used for the training. Once the network stabilized,
all 23 samples were used for the training. In the data
preprocessing, considering the limited GPU memory, each
image was partitioned without overlapping into a set of
subimages of size 512 × 512.
B. Experimental Settings
1) Implementation Details: All the experiments were
conducted on an NVIDIA RTX 4090 GPU using the PyTorch
framework [54]. To expedite convergence, we employed the
AdamW optimizer [55] to train the model, and the weight
decay was set to 0.02. The learning rate was employed
with the WarmUp strategy and MultiStepLR strategy, with an
initial learning rate of 5e−5 . Following the WarmUp strategy,
the learning rate was gradually increased to 1e−4 within a
fixed epoch (5 for the WHU-OPT-SAR and Potsdam datasets,
10 for the Vaihingen dataset). To prevent the effect of random
initialization parameters on the model training, a consistent
random seed of 42 was used for all the experiments. The
cross-entropy loss was chosen as the loss function.
In the training period, data augmentation was applied
through random rotation, random flipping, and random scaling
[0.5, 0.75, 1, 1.25, 1.5, 1.75]. More specifically, for the WHUOPT-SAR dataset, the training epochs numbered 60 while
the batch size was set to 6. For the Vaihingen dataset, the
training epochs numbered 150 while the batch size was
set to 24. For the Potsdam dataset, the training epochs
numbered 50 while the batch size was set to 6. In the testing
phase, overlapping sliding windows were employed to extract
the small predicted patches. After obtaining the prediction
results, the average value was taken for the overlapping
parts, effectively correcting the minor errors at the boundaries
caused by stitching, and further reducing the boundary effects.
Meanwhile, to keep the inference time within an acceptable
range, the overlap was set to 1/3. In addition, multiscale
augmentation with a scale of [0.75, 1, 1.25] and random
flipping were applied.
2) Evaluation Metrics: To validate the effectiveness of the
proposed CFFormer framework, we used two main categories
of evaluation metrics in the experiments. The first category
of methods was used to assess the model’s accuracy, i.e., the
overall accuracy (OA), mean intersection over union (mIoU),
Kappa coefficient (Kappa), and F1-score [22], [61]. The
second category of methods was used to evaluate the model’s
scale, i.e., the assessment of complexity through the floating
point operation count (FLOPs) and the number of model
parameters (Params), as well as evaluating the inference speed
in frames per second (FPS).
3) Comparative Models: To comprehensively validate the
superiority of the proposed model on the WHU-OPT-SAR,
Vaihingen, and Potsdam datasets, we compared CFFormer
with 11 other SOTA methods.
a) CFFormer: The CFFormer network is a framework
designed specifically for the semantic segmentation of
multisource RSIs. It processes extracted optical modal features
and complementary modal features through the FCM and
FFM. We built three versions of the network—CFFormerTiny, CFFormer-Small, and CFFormer-Base—corresponding

Fig. 5.
Visualization of the segmentation results for the WHU-OPT-SAR dataset. (a1)–(a4) Optical image. (b1)–(b4) SAR image. (c1)–(c4)
Ground truth. (d1)–(d4) V_FuseNet. (e1)–(e4) CFNet. (f1)–(f4) MCANet.
(g1)–(g4) CMGFNet. (h1)–(h4) CMX. (i1)–(i4) AFNet. (j1)–(j4) Proposed-Tiny.

to the use of BiFormer-Tiny, BiFormer-Small, and BiFormerBase [35] as the backbone network, respectively.
b) DeepLabv3+: Chen et al. [56] proposed this network.
The network extends the DeepLabv3 network [29] by
refining the segmentation results with a simple and effective
decoder module. Furthermore, it applies depth-wise separable
convolution to the atrous spatial pyramid pooling (ASPP)
module, effectively enhancing the segmentation efficiency of
the model.
c) SVL_3: Gerke [48] proposed this network. This
method is based on stair vision library (SVL) features while
simultaneously incorporating features from the normalized
difference vegetation index (NDVI), saturation data, and DSM
data. The classifier employs an AdaBoost-based approach, and

4401117

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

TABLE I
Q UANTITATIVE C OMPARISON R ESULTS ON THE WHU-OPT-SAR DATASET

a conditional random field (CRF) algorithm is introduced for
postprocessing the results.
d) UFMG_4: Nogueira et al. [62] proposed this method.
Based on a cascaded CNN network, this method utilizes
dilated convolutions instead of regular convolutions.
e) CASIA2: Liu et al. [5] proposed this method. This
network is based on the U-Net network and introduces a
self-cascaded CNN module for fusing multiscale features. The
network’s encoder employs VGGNet and ResNet, while only
IRRG data are used for the training and inference.
f) SA-Gate: Chen et al. [57] proposed this network.
This network is designed with a separation and aggregation
gate module, which filters and calibrates the two modal
features before fusion. This design has demonstrated excellent
performances in RGB-D semantic segmentation tasks.
g) V_FuseNet: Audebert et al. [24] proposed this
network. This network utilizes multiscale features for loss
computation, and experimental analyses are performed for
early fusion and late fusion of multimodal features.
h) CFNet: Kang et al. [28] proposed this network. This
network is based on a multisource RSI classification network
that allows flexible adjustment of fusion positions. In addition,
it incorporates a lightweight multiscale feature extraction
module to fully leverage the features from different modalities.
i) MCANet: Li et al. [10] proposed this network. This
network is based on a semantic segmentation framework
that integrates optical and SAR images. It uses a parallel
dual-encoder structure to extract optical and SAR features
separately, and effectively fuses these two modalities through
a cross-attention module. It is worth noting that the WHUOPT-SAR dataset used in this article was open-sourced by the
authors.
j) CMGFNet: Hosseinpour et al. [58] proposed this
network. This method employs two independent encoders to
extract multilevel features from high-resolution RSI and DSM
images. Through a gate fusion module, it combines features
from both modalities, and a top-down strategy is used to fuse
the high-level features with low-level features.
k) CMX: Zhang et al. [59] proposed this network. This
network is a universal cross-modal fusion architecture that
adopts a dual-stream structure to independently extract features
from the RGB modality and other modalities. It has achieved
superior results on several multimodal datasets.

l) AFNet: Yang et al. [60] proposed this network. This
network uses a multipath encoder structure that is capable
of simultaneously extracting optical and DSM features.
In addition, it incorporates a multipath attention fusion module
for fusing features from different modalities and a refined
attention fusion module for combining shallow and deep
features. The network achieved SOTA results on the Vaihingen
dataset and Potsdam dataset at the time of publication.
m) BEDSN: Li et al. [63] proposed this network. This
network is a new boundary-enhanced dual-flow network
(BEDSN) in which an edge-detection branch stream with a
composite loss function (EDBS) is introduced to compensate
for the boundary loss in the semantically segmented branch
stream (SSBS). EDBS and SSBS are integrated through
highly coupled encoders and feature extractors. A lightweight
multilevel information fusion module guided by the channel
attention mechanism is designed to reuse intermediate
boundary information effectively. The multiscale feature
extraction module and the mixed attribute convolution module
are used to enhance the SSBS for the aggregation of multiscale
context information.
C. Experimental Results
Results Obtained on the WHU-OPT-SAR Dataset: WHUOPT-SAR is a large-scale land-use classification dataset of
multisource RSIs, covering an area of about 50 000 km2.
In this study, we compared the three versions of the proposed
model with several other advanced multimodal semantic
segmentation networks on the official WHU-OPT-SAR test
set. In addition, we conducted two sets of experiments using
the DeepLabv3 + network: one with optical images as
the input, named DeepLabv3 + (OPT), and another with
a concatenation of optical and SAR images as the input,
named DeepLabv3 + (OPT-SAR). As illustrated in Table I,
the results of DeepLabv3 + (OPT) and DeepLabv3 + (OPTSAR) suggest that simple fusion not only fails to effectively
utilize the multimodal information but may also even degrade
the model’s performance to some extent. Furthermore, the
three versions of the proposed model exhibit a significant
advantage across all the metrics. Taking the example of the
CFFormer-Base network, which adopts BiFormer-Base [39]
as the backbone network, it shows improvements in mIoU

ZHAO et al.: CFFormer FOR THE SEMANTIC SEGMENTATION OF MULTISOURCE REMOTE SENSING IMAGES

4401117

TABLE II
Q UANTITATIVE C OMPARISON R ESULTS ON THE VAIHINGEN DATASET

and OA over the previously best-performing AFNet network
of 4.71% and 1.74%, respectively, while maintaining an
advantage in F1-score for each category. Compared with
the CFNet and MCANet networks specifically designed for
handling optical and SAR images, CFFormer-Base achieves
a notable improvement of 6.75% and 6.48% in mIoU,
demonstrating the effectiveness of the proposed method.
In addition, when dealing with challenging segmentation tasks
for elongated categories such as roads and small objects
such as the others category, the proposed model shows an
impressive performance. Specifically, the F1-score for the
road category and others category with the CFFormer-Base
network is 62.7% and 41.6%, respectively, surpassing the
other methods by an average of 10.1% and 13.7%, effectively
improving the results of RSI segmentation. Furthermore,
the visualization results in four different regions of the
WHU-OPT-SAR test set (see Fig. 5) also demonstrate the
effectiveness of the proposed method. In the first and
second regions of the experiments, CFFormer establishes
long-range dependencies between distant pixels by using
the transformer-based backbone networks, leveraging global
contextual information to significantly improve the continuity
of road [see Fig. 5(j1)] and water [see Fig. 5(j2)] segmentation
in complex scenes. In the last two regions of the experiments,
the other advanced methods show large-scale confusion, while
the proposed approach eliminates noise and the differences
in the cross-modal data through the FCM and further extracts
the complementary features by using the FFM to effectively
alleviate this issue. More results are presented in Fig. 6.
Results Obtained on the Vaihingen Dataset: The Vaihingen
dataset is widely used in RSI segmentation tasks. Up to now,
there have been a number of models designed specifically
for this dataset that have achieved a high accuracy. To comprehensively compare the proposed method with the other
methods, we selected three models that have performed well
on the Vaihingen and Potsdam dataset leaderboards—SVL_3,
UFMG_4, and CASIA2—which are unimodal segmentation
networks that use only optical RSIs. In addition, seven
advanced multimodal RSI segmentation networks were used
to compare the segmentation results in multimodal scenarios.
The experimental results are listed in Table II, where it can
be seen that the proposed network significantly outperforms
the other methods in segmentation accuracy. The mIoU and
OA for the tiny version and small version and base version

Fig. 6. Visualization of the segmentation results for the WHU-OPT-SAR
dataset. (a1)–(a4) Optical image. (b1)–(b4) SAR image. (c1)–(c4) Ground
truth. (d1)–(d4) V_FuseNet. (e1)–(e4) CFNet. (f1)–(f4) MCANet.
(g1)–(g4) CMGFNet. (h1)–(h4) CMX. (i1)–(i4) AFNet. (j1)–(j4) Proposed.

are 84.06%/91.72%, 84.31%/91.88%, and 81.72%/90.74%,
respectively. Specifically, the OA of CFFormer-Small is
improved by 0.78% when compared to CASIA2, which
performs the best among the unimodal networks, and by 1.08%
when compared to CMX, which performs the best among the
multimodal networks. Furthermore, it can be observed that,
although the accuracy of most of the multimodal segmentation
networks is higher than that of the unimodal segmentation
networks, the opposite also exists. This is because there can
be serious noise and differences between the features of
the different modalities. Without effective handling, this can
lead to mutual interference between the different modalities,
thereby reducing the segmentation accuracy. The mIoU of the

4401117

Fig. 7.
Visualization of the segmentation results for the Vaihingen
dataset. (a1)–(a6) Optical image. (b1)–(b6) DSM image. (c1)–(c6) Ground
truth. (d1)–(d6) V_FuseNet. (e1)–(e6) CFNet. (f1)–(f6) MCANet. (g1)–(g6)
CMGFNet. (h1)–(h6) CMX. (i1)–(i6) AFNet. (j1)–(j6) Proposed-Small.

Proposed-Base is lower compared to the Proposed-Tiny and
Proposed-Small. This is because, compared with the WHUOPT-SAR dataset and the Potsdam dataset, the Vaihingen
dataset contains fewer images. As a variant structure based
on variants with different structures. For datasets with fewer
samples, the deeper the model structure is, the more likely
it is to cause overfitting on the test set. Through our
several experiments, we have found that the network depth
of Proposed-Tiny and Proposed-Small is more suitable for
the Vaihingen dataset. The proposed method reduces the
differences and noise between optical images and DSM
images through the FCM and captures their complementary
features using the cross-attention mechanism, achieving
superior results. The visual comparison of the segmentation
results in Fig. 7 indicates that the segmentation map of
CFFormer is the most detailed and closest to the ground truth.
In contrast, the other advanced networks in this experiment
exhibit different degrees of mutual misclassification between
impervious surfaces, low vegetation, buildings, and trees,
and their segmentation results also show coarser features
[see Fig. 7(g3), (d5), and (d6)]. The proposed network
fully extracts and utilizes the global information provided
by the transformer-based encoder and multiscale information
provided by the decoder, combined with auxiliary information
from the DSM, achieving the best segmentation results. More
results are presented in Fig. 8.
Results Obtained on the Potsdam Dataset: For a comprehensive evaluation, we further conducted experiments on the
Potsdam dataset. The results are listed in Table III, where
all three versions of the proposed models lead in all the
metrics. The OA of CFFormer-Tiny is 15.19% and 4.49%
higher than those of the unimodal segmentation networks
SVL_3 and UFMG_4, respectively. Compared to V_FuseNet,
CMGFNet, and AFNet, which are specifically designed for
this dataset, CFFormer-Base improves the mIoU and OA

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

Fig. 8.
Visualization of the segmentation results for the Vaihingen
dataset. (a1)–(a6) Optical image. (b1)–(b6) DSM image. (c1)–(c6) Ground
truth. (d1)–(d6) V_FuseNet. (e1)–(e6) CFNet. (f1)–(f6) MCANet. (g1)–(g6)
CMGFNet. (h1)–(h6) CMX. (i1)–(i6) AFNet. (j1)–(j6) Proposed.

TABLE III
Q UANTITATIVE C OMPARISON R ESULTS ON THE P OTSDAM DATASET

by 5.49%/2.99%/3.24% and 3.52%/1.8%/1.86%, respectively.
For the dense small object categories such as cars, the
proposed method achieves a 97% F1-score, which is an
average improvement of 5.07% over the other methods.
This fully demonstrates that the proposed method not only
performs excellently in overall performance, but also exhibits
significant superiority in handling small targets. In addition,
we also provide the segmentation results in Fig. 9 for the
CFFormer-Base network and the other advanced networks to
further demonstrate the superior performance of the proposed
network. Consistent with its performance on the Vaihingen
dataset, CFFormer accurately segments the different objects in
the various challenging scenarios, including objects occluded
by trees and buildings (first, second, and fourth sets of
experiments) and objects with similar spectral characteristics
(third set of experiments). These results indicate that,
compared to the other multimodal segmentation networks, the
FCM and FFM in the proposed approach can comprehensively
utilize the complementary information from optical and
elevation features for collaborative scene understanding to
obtain the most accurate segmentation results. More results
are presented in Fig. 10.

ZHAO et al.: CFFormer FOR THE SEMANTIC SEGMENTATION OF MULTISOURCE REMOTE SENSING IMAGES

Fig. 9.
Visualization of the segmentation results for the Potsdam
dataset. (a1)–(a4) Optical image. (b1)–(b4) DSM image. (c1)–(c4) Ground
truth. (d1)–(d4) V_FuseNet. (e1)–(e4) CFNet. (f1)–(f4) MCANet. (g1)–(g4)
CMGFNet. (h1)–(h4) CMX. (i1)–(i4) AFNet. (j1)–(j4) Proposed-Base.

4401117

Fig. 10.
Visualization of the segmentation results for the Potsdam
dataset. (a1)–(a4) Optical image. (b1)–(b4) DSM image. (c1)–(c4) Ground
truth. (d1)–(d4) V_FuseNet. (e1)–(e4) CFNet. (f1)–(f4) MCANet. (g1)–(g4)
CMGFNet. (h1)–(h4) CMX. (i1)–(i4) AFNet. (j1)–(j4) Proposed.

TABLE IV

TABLE V

A BLATION S TUDY FOR THE FCM/FFM ON
THE WHU-OPT-SAR DATASET

A BLATION S TUDY FOR THE FCM VARIANTS
ON THE WHU-OPT-SAR DATASET

Overall Analyses of Datasets: The types of the three datasets
are not consistent. The WHU-OPT-SAR dataset (see Table I)
includes SAR and optical images, while the Vaihingen and
Potsdam datasets (see Tables II and III) contain optical and

DSM images. The difference among the three versions of
the proposed methods lies in the network’s depth. For the
Proposed-Tiny version, the model has the shallowest layers.
Based on our experimental results on the three datasets,
it can be observed that, compared to other categories, building
or city categories with more regular shapes often achieve

4401117

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

TABLE VI
A BLATION S TUDY FOR THE FFM VARIANTS ON
THE WHU-OPT-SAR DATASET

better segmentation when the model has shallower layers.
This indicates that the shallower layers of the network focus
more on local texture information [64], [65]. Therefore,
for Proposed-Tiny, the segmentation of large land cover
categories with regular block-like shapes (such as buildings
or cities) is usually more effective. In the Potsdam dataset,
the data sources used are optical and DSM images. In optical
RSIs, it is difficult to distinguish between trees and low
vegetation with similar color and texture information. The
elevation information provided by DSM can compensate for
the shortcomings of optical RSIs. As the depth of the model
increases, the model can capture more information about
both modalities. As a result, the trees and low vegetation
categories in the Proposed-Small version have better accuracy
than the Proposed-Tiny version. However, models with deeper
structures may dilute the height information provided by the
DSM [66], [67], which leads to confusion during feature
fusion. That is the reason why the results of trees and low
vegetation in the Proposed-Base version are less accurate than
the Proposed-Small version.
D. Ablation Study
To evaluate the effectiveness of each module in the proposed
method, we carried out a series of ablation experiments, which
are elaborated in this section. All the experiments involved
training and testing on the WHU-OPT-SAR dataset. Unless
otherwise specified, we used BiFormer-Tiny as the backbone
network for the ablation experiments.
1) Effectiveness of the FCM and FFM: As shown in Fig. 2,
we embedded the FCM and FFM in the encoder–decoder
structure to correct and fuse two sets of features from different
modalities. To evaluate the impact of these two modules
on the segmentation accuracy of the CFFormer framework,
we conducted ablation experiments on the test set. In the
experiments, “✓” indicates the inclusion of the corresponding
module. If the FCM was ablated, the features extracted from
the two branches were not corrected. If the FFM was not used,
the extracted multimodal features were simply summed and
then input into the decoder. The specific results are listed in
Table IV. Compared to the baseline, adding the FCM increases
the mIoU and OA by 1.02% and 0.31%, respectively, while
adding the FFM increases the mIoU by 0.75%. When both
the FCM and FFM are used, the effect is maximized, with the
mIoU and OA increasing by 2.25% and 0.82%, respectively,
achieving the effect of “1 + 1 > 2.” This is because there
are significant differences and noise between the features of
the different modalities. Only by first reducing the mutual
interference through feature correction can better interaction

and fusion be achieved, leading to superior segmentation
results.
2) Feature Correction First Versus Channel-wise Feature
Correction First: To further explore the effect of the FCM
on the CFFormer, we conducted ablation experiments on the
sequence of spatial-wise feature correction and channel-wise
feature correction. “Channel -> Spatial” represents performing
the channel-wise correction first and then the spatial-wise
correction, while “Spatial -> Channel” is the opposite.
As shown in Table V, there is a 0.24% improvement in mIoU
when using the spatial-wise feature correction first versus
using the channel-wise feature correction first. We attribute
this to the fact that the intuitive local appearance differences
between the different modalities are more pronounced than
the abstract global semantic differences. Therefore, achieving
the best experimental results involves first eliminating the
large local spatial differences through spatial-wise correction
and then eliminating the slightly smaller global semantic
differences through channel-wise correction.
3) Ablation Study With FFM Variants: Similarly, to further
study the effect of the FFM on CFFormer, we conducted
ablation experiments on the way of information fusion between
different modalities. “Add” and “Concat” represent fusing
the corrected features directly by addition and concatenation
without using the cross-attention mechanism, and “CrossAttn”
represents using the cross-attention mechanism designed in
this study. The experimental results in Table VI show
that, when using the cross-attention mechanism, the best
segmentation accuracy is achieved, with the mIoU and
OA reaching 57.51% and 85.13%, respectively. This further
demonstrates that, by transforming the corrected features into
sequences and globally interacting the information between
different modalities from a sequence-to-sequence perspective,
complementary relationships can be effectively mined, thereby
improving the model’s performance. It is worth noting that the
“Concat” method achieves a 0.37% increase in mIoU when
compared to the “Add” method. This is because the sparsity
between the features of different modalities is weak, and most
positions in the data contain valid information. In this case,
using concatenation provides more comprehensive and richer
fusion features.
4) Effectiveness of Different Types of Encoders: Currently,
remote sensing-based segmentation networks commonly apply
a CNN as the encoder. This is because CNNs can effectively
capture the local correlations in the input images through
convolution operations. However, due to the local nature of
the convolution operators, CNNs have significant limitations
in modeling the global relationships in images. In contrast,
transformers, through the self-attention mechanisms, excel at
capturing the global information in RSIs while establishing
the based BiFormer-Tiny network, BiFormer-Small network,
long-range dependencies in information-dense multimodal
BiFormer-Base network and a hybrid SMT-Tiny network [57]
as encoders in the proposed framework on the WHU-OPTSAR dataset. The experimental results listed in Table VII
show that the transformer model achieves the best accuracies
in terms of the mIoU and OA, reaching 58.0% and 85.3%,
respectively. Compared to the CNN model, it improves

ZHAO et al.: CFFormer FOR THE SEMANTIC SEGMENTATION OF MULTISOURCE REMOTE SENSING IMAGES

4401117

TABLE VII
R ESULTS FOR D IFFERENT T YPES OF E NCODERS ON THE WHU-OPT-SAR DATASET. T HE C OMPLEXITY AND S PEED W ERE M EASURED BY
THE 512 × 512 I NPUT OF OPT AND SAR DATA ON AN NVIDIA RTX 4090 GPU

TABLE VIII
A BLATION S TUDY FOR THE N UMBER OF D ECODER L AYERS ON THE WHU-OPT-SAR DATASET

the mIoU and OA by 3.2% and 1.3%, respectively, which
effectively proves the importance of global information
and long-range dependency modeling for multimodal RSI
segmentation tasks. Meanwhile, the CNN model achieves
advantages in model complexity and inference speed.
Especially, the inference speed of CNN is 4.4×, 4.3×,
2.8×, and 2.5× faster than the three transformer models and
the hybrid CNN-transformer, respectively. CNN-transformer
performs at a moderate level in almost all the metrics, with a
slightly improved accuracy when compared to the CNN model,
but with significant differences in speed and complexity.
Therefore, considering the characteristics of multimodal RSIs,
we finally chose the transformer model as the encoder of the
proposed method, while we believe that CNN models still
hold significant potential, especially for real-time segmentation
tasks.
5) Effectiveness of the Number of Decoder Layers:
The encoder–decoder architecture, which is known for its
outstanding performance and efficient flexibility, has been
widely applied in semantic segmentation tasks. In this study,
we fully leveraged the characteristics of this architecture
by using the downsampled features at each stage of the
backbone network as inputs to the corresponding FCM. After
obtaining fused features at different scales, we employed
multiple convolutional layers and upsampling operations to
restore the spatial resolution of these features to have the
same dimensions. During the experiments, we observed that
features from a single layer, or a few layers, may lack sufficient
contextual information, leading to the loss of critical details
when the model comprehends the overall image context.
Nevertheless, excessively deep architectures not only escalate
computational expenses but may also result in overfitting
during the training phase. Our experimental results suggest
that the four-layer structure is the most reliable and practical.
As shown in Table VIII, the comprehensive use of features
from four scales yields the best results, with a mIoU of
57.51%, which is an improvement of 8.17% compared to
using features from a single layer. Moreover, the F1-score for

TABLE IX
A BLATION S TUDY OF S TANDARD D EVIATION P OOLING OF FCM M ODULE
ON WHU-OPT-SAR DATASET

the other and road categories experienced significant increases
of 240% (from 17.1% to 41.2%) and 130% (from 47.6% to
61.6%), respectively. Before the fourth layer, the accuracy of
the network increased the importance of multiscale features
in RSI segmentation tasks with each additional feature layer,
which further demonstrates.
6) Effectiveness of Standard Deviation Pooling in FCM
Modules: As illustrated in Fig. 3, we have integrated
global average pooling, global maximum pooling, and global
standard deviation pooling within the channel-wise correction
mechanism of the FCM module. To gauge the influence
of standard deviation pooling on the segmentation accuracy
within the CFFormer architecture, we performed ablation
studies using the test dataset. In these experiments, the
presence of a module is indicated by a “✓.” When global
standard deviation pooling is engaged, it operates alongside
global average and maximum pooling. The comprehensive
results are detailed in Table IX. The introduction of global
standard deviation pooling, in contrast to using global average
and global maximum pooling alone, boosts the mIoU by
0.82% and the OA by 0.39%. Global standard deviation
pooling enables the model to focus on feature changes and
distribution information. It allows our model to concentrate on
more meaningful features and adapt to different types and data
distributions, resulting in more refined segmentation results.
E. Efficiency Analysis
Model accuracy and model complexity are critical factors
in assessing the overall performance of a network. Therefore,
we used six metrics—mIoU, OA, mF1-Score, Kappa, number

4401117

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

TABLE X
E FFICIENCY R ESULTS ON THE WHU-OPT-SAR DATASET. T HE C OMPLEXITY WAS M EASURED BY THE 512 × 512
I NPUT OF OPT AND SAR DATA ON AN NVIDIA RTX 4090 GPU

TABLE XI
A BLATION S TUDY OF D IFFERENT M ODALITIES ON
THE WHU-OPT-SAR DATASET

of parameters, and FLOPs—to compare the proposed method
on the WHU-OPT-SAR dataset based on model accuracy and
complexity. In the experiments, two BiFormer-Tiny backbone
networks were employed to extract optical and SAR features,
and all other model methods also used two branches for feature
extraction. The training and testing were conducted using the
WHU-OPT-SAR dataset. The specific results are presented in
Table X. It can be observed that the computational cost of
the Proposed-Tiny is lower than those of many models, being
only higher than that of CFNet (see Table X). Meanwhile,
Proposed-Tiny has improved in all accuracy metrics, with an
increase of 6.26% in mIoU, 2.35% in OA, 6.3% in mF1-Score,
and 3.6% in Kappa. Our Proposed-Tiny model achieves higher
accuracy while maintaining a small number of parameters and
a low amount of computation. Our Proposed-Small model
and Proposed-Base model achieve higher accuracy while the
number of parameters is close to those of other models. The
experimental results indicate that increased parameters do not
always positively correlate with improved accuracy. Moreover,
a good architecture and feature fusion strategy are more
important than increasing parameters in image segmentation
performance.
IV. Q UALITATIVE A NALYSIS AND D ISCUSSION
A. Unimodal and Multimodal Results
The core advantage of CFFormer is that it can fully
extract and utilize the complementary information between
different modalities to obtain more accurate segmentation
results. To demonstrate this, we show the segmentation results
of the BiFormer-Tiny network using only optical images and
the CFFormer-Tiny network jointly using optical images and
SAR or DSM images in Fig. 11.
In the WHU-OPT-SAR dataset, as shown in Fig. 11(a),
the BiFormer-Tiny network mistakenly segments the city
into the village and almost fails to recognize the water near
the forest due to the difficulty in distinguishing spectrally

Fig. 11. Visualization of the semantic segmentation results for OPT-only
and for the OPT-SAR/DSM methods. We applied Biformer-Tiny for the
OPT-only segmentation and the proposed method with the same backbone
of Biformer-Tiny for the OPT-SAR/DSM segmentation. (a) Visualization
comparison on the WHU-OPT-SAR dataset. (b) Visualization comparison on
the Vaihingen (top) and Potsdam (bottom) datasets.

similar categories such as city from village and water from
forest. However, in SAR images, water presents darker
features because its backscattering coefficient is low due
to its relatively smooth surface, while the city presents
bright features due to the presence of artificial structures
such as buildings, which make the surface relatively rough
and capable of inducing strong backscattering. The proposed
CFFormer-Tiny makes full use of these characteristics to
provide good complementary information for the optical
images and realizes the accurate segmentation of the confusing
categories mentioned above. In the Vaihingen and Potsdam
datasets, as shown in Fig. 11(b), tree and low vegetation
present highly similar appearances and contours in the optical
images, causing the BiFormer-Tiny network, which relies only
on the optical images, to misidentify low vegetation as trees.
The proposed method successfully solves this difficulty with
the help of the elevation difference information provided by the
DSM. In addition, CFFormer-Tiny is also more accurate than
BiFormer-Tiny in edge-detailed segmentation. In conclusion,

ZHAO et al.: CFFormer FOR THE SEMANTIC SEGMENTATION OF MULTISOURCE REMOTE SENSING IMAGES

4401117

showing regularly distributed long strips. A similar situation
is even more evident in the DSM modality, where the car and
the ground are almost indistinguishable in the precorrection
features, and after injecting the complementary information
from the optical image, the contour of the car and the position
of the ground are clearly visible. In addition, by observing
the difference map of the optical features, it can be found
that the boundary information of the optical features is further
enhanced after correction, while some unnecessary noise is
filtered out. In summary, the proposed FCM can effectively
leverage the complementary information between multimodal
data to eliminate the differences and noise between them, so as
to realize more accurate semantic understanding.
V. C ONCLUSION

Fig. 12. Visualization of the features extracted in layer 1, their corrected
counterparts, and the difference maps between them.

the experimental results fully demonstrate the powerful
performance of CFFormer in the multimodal remote sensing
semantic segmentation task. Compared to unimodal networks,
CFFormer also exhibits stronger robustness and a superior
generalization performance. We have utilized a multimodal
structure to design networks integrating information from
different modalities. To evaluate the effectiveness of this
architectural design, we conducted ablation studies on the test
dataset. Our ablation studies included single-modal networks
using only optical images, and multimodal networks using
both optical and SAR images. The detailed results are
presented in Table XI. The segmentation result achieved with
the multimodal structure surpasses those only using optical
images by 2.83%. This strongly validates the effectiveness of
the multimodal structure: the integration of multisource images
promotes efficient information exchange through interaction,
leading to better fusion and complementarity, and ultimately
enhancing the accuracy of segmentation.

In this article, we have proposed a universal CFFormer for
the semantic segmentation of joint optical RSIs and other
remote sensing data, such as SAR and DSM data. In terms
of the differences and interference noise between multimodal
RSIs, we designed the FCM to correct the features from the
different modalities in both the spatial and channel dimensions,
so that the different modalities can pay more attention
to the complementary information between each other.
To fully exploit the complementarity between multimodal
data, we proposed the FFM, which utilizes a multihead
cross-attention mechanism to interact and fuse features of
the same scale from two modalities. Extensive benchmark
experiments and ablation studies conducted on the WHUOPT-SAR, Vaihingen, and Potsdam datasets demonstrated
the effectiveness and robustness of the proposed approach
for multisource remote sensing applications. Meanwhile, the
visualization results indicated that CFFormer can effectively
identify spectrally similar objects in optical images using
the complementary information provided by SAR and DSM
data, resulting in more accurate segmentation. However, the
universal module that we presented in this study was intended
to harness the complementarity of different modal information
regardless of the imaging mechanism. In the future, we will
design a model by considering the physical mechanisms of
different images to increase its interpretability.
R EFERENCES

B. Feature Correction
To better understand the working principles of the FCM,
we visualize in Fig. 12 the features extracted from layer
1 before correction, the features after passing through the
FCM, as well as the difference maps between them. It is
obvious that, after cross-modal feature correction, the feature
maps in the different modalities are corrected and enhanced
accordingly, while the intermodal disparities are significantly
improved.
The optical modality transfers the spectral and textural
information to the SAR and DSM modalities, while the SAR
and DSM modalities locate the boundaries of the optical
modality more precisely. In the second row, the uncorrected
SAR modality displays irregular chunks in the farmland area,
whereas, after correction, the farmland contours become clear,

[1] W.-K. Baek, M.-J. Lee, and H.-S. Jung, “Land cover classification from
RGB and NIR satellite images using modified U-Net model,” IEEE
Access, vol. 12, pp. 69445–69455, 2024.
[2] D. Hong et al., “SpectralFormer: Rethinking hyperspectral image
classification with transformers,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5518615.
[3] X. Wang, K. Tan, P. Du, C. Pan, and J. Ding, “A unified multiscale
learning framework for hyperspectral image classification,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 4508319.
[4] Y. Zhang, W. Li, W. Sun, R. Tao, and Q. Du, “Single-source domain
expansion network for cross-scene hyperspectral image classification,”
IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 32, pp. 1498–1512, 2023.
[5] Y. Liu, B. Fan, L. Wang, J. Bai, S. Xiang, and C. Pan, “Semantic labeling
in very high resolution images via a self-cascaded convolutional neural
network,” ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens., vol. 145, pp. 78–95,
Nov. 2018.
[6] L. Yan, B. Fan, H. Liu, C. Huo, S. Xiang, and C. Pan, “Triplet
adversarial domain adaptation for pixel-level classification of VHR
remote sensing images,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 58,
no. 5, pp. 3558–3573, May 2020.

4401117

[7] H. Yao, R. Qin, and X. Chen, “Unmanned aerial vehicle for remote
sensing applications—A review,” Remote Sens., vol. 11, no. 12, p. 1443,
Jun. 2019.
[8] Y. Zhang, Q. Zhu, Y. Zhong, Q. Guan, L. Zhang, and D. Li, “A
modified D-Linknet with transfer learning for road extraction from highresolution remote sensing,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Geosci. Remote Sens.
Symp., Sep. 2020, pp. 1817–1820.
[9] Q. Zhu et al., “A global context-aware and batch-independent network
for road extraction from VHR satellite imagery,” ISPRS J. Photogramm.
Remote Sens., vol. 175, pp. 353–365, May 2021.
[10] X. Li et al., “MCANet: A joint semantic segmentation framework of
optical and SAR images for land use classification,” Int. J. Appl. Earth
Observ. Geoinformation, vol. 106, Feb. 2022, Art. no. 102638.
[11] B. Ren et al., “A dual-stream high resolution network: Deep fusion of
GF-2 and GF-3 data for land cover classification,” Int. J. Appl. Earth
Observ. Geoinformation, vol. 112, Aug. 2022, Art. no. 102896.
[12] X. Li, L. Lei, C. Zhang, and G. Kuang, “Multimodal semantic
consistency-based fusion architecture search for land cover classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
Art. no. 4412414.
[13] Y. Peng, J. He, Q. Yuan, S. Wang, X. Chu, and L. Zhang, “Automated
glacier extraction using a transformer based deep learning approach from
multi-sensor remote sensing imagery,” ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote
Sens., vol. 202, pp. 303–313, Aug. 2023.
[14] J. Yao, B. Zhang, C. Li, D. Hong, and J. Chanussot, “Extended vision
transformer (ExViT) for land use and land cover classification: A
multimodal deep learning framework,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5514415.
[15] S. K. Roy, A. Deria, D. Hong, B. Rasti, A. Plaza, and J. Chanussot,
“Multimodal fusion transformer for remote sensing image classification,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5515620.
[16] J. Gao, Q. Yuan, J. Li, H. Zhang, and X. Su, “Cloud removal with fusion
of high resolution optical and SAR images using generative adversarial
networks,” Remote Sens., vol. 12, no. 1, p. 191, Jan. 2020.
[17] X. He, Y. Chen, L. Huang, D. Hong, and Q. Du, “Foundation modelbased multimodal remote sensing data classification,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5502117.
[18] X. Wu, D. Hong, and J. Chanussot, “Convolutional neural networks
for multimodal remote sensing data classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5517010.
[19] R. Girma, C. Fürst, and A. Moges, “Land use land cover change
modeling by integrating artificial neural network with cellular automataMarkov chain model in Gidabo river basin, main Ethiopian rift,” Environ.
Challenges, vol. 6, Jan. 2022, Art. no. 100419.
[20] J. R. Jensen, F. Qiu, and K. Patterson, “A neural network image
interpretation system to extract rural and urban land use and land cover
information from remote sensor data,” Geocarto Int., vol. 16, no. 1,
pp. 21–30, 2001.
[21] H. Yuan, C. Van Der Wiele, and S. Khorram, “An automated artificial
neural network system for land use/land cover classification from landsat
TM imagery,” Remote Sens., vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 243–265, Jul. 2009.
[22] Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, and G. Hinton, “Deep learning,” Nature, vol. 521,
no. 7553, pp. 436–444, 2015.
[23] X. Yuan, J. Shi, and L. Gu, “A review of deep learning methods for
semantic segmentation of remote sensing imagery,” Expert Syst. Appl.,
vol. 169, May 2021, Art. no. 114417.
[24] N. Audebert, B. Le Saux, and S. Lefèvre, “Beyond RGB: Very high
resolution urban remote sensing with multimodal deep networks,” ISPRS
J. Photogramm. Remote Sens., vol. 140, pp. 20–32, Jun. 2018.
[25] C. Peng, Y. Li, L. Jiao, Y. Chen, and R. Shang, “Densely based multiscale and multi-modal fully convolutional networks for high-resolution
remote-sensing image semantic segmentation,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl.
Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 12, no. 8, pp. 2612–2626, Aug. 2019.
[26] J. Jin et al., “DASFNet: Dense-attention–similarity-fusion network for
scene classification of dual-modal remote-sensing images,” Int. J. Appl.
Earth Observ. Geoinformation, vol. 115, Dec. 2022, Art. no. 103087.
[27] X. Li, L. Lei, Y. Sun, M. Li, and G. Kuang, “Multimodal bilinear fusion
network with second-order attention-based channel selection for land
cover classification,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote
Sens., vol. 13, pp. 1011–1026, 2020.
[28] W. Kang, Y. Xiang, F. Wang, and H. You, “CFNet: A cross fusion
network for joint land cover classification using optical and SAR
images,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 15,
pp. 1562–1574, 2022.
[29] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” 2017, arXiv:1706.03762.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

[30] X. Zhu, W. Su, L. Lu, B. Li, X. Wang, and J. Dai, “Deformable
DETR: Deformable transformers for end-to-end object detection,” 2020,
arXiv:2010.04159.
[31] A. Dosovitskiy et al., “An image is worth 16×16 words: Transformers
for image recognition at scale,” 2020, arXiv:2010.11929.
[32] S. Zheng et al., “Rethinking semantic segmentation from a sequenceto-sequence perspective with transformers,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), 2021, pp. 6877–6886.
[33] L. Wang, R. Li, C. Duan, C. Zhang, X. Meng, and S. Fang, “A novel
transformer based semantic segmentation scheme for fine-resolution
remote sensing images,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 19,
pp. 1–5, 2022.
[34] L. Wang, R. Li, D. Wang, C. Duan, T. Wang, and X. Meng,
“Transformer meets convolution: A bilateral awareness network for
semantic segmentation of very fine resolution urban scene images,”
Remote Sens., vol. 13, no. 16, p. 3065, Aug. 2021.
[35] L. Wang et al., “UNetFormer: A UNet-like transformer for efficient
semantic segmentation of remote sensing urban scene imagery,” ISPRS
J. Photogramm. Remote Sens., vol. 190, pp. 196–214, May 2022.
[36] R. Ji, K. Tan, X. Wang, C. Pan, and L. Xin, “PASSNet: A spatial–
spectral feature extraction network with patch attention module for
hyperspectral image classification,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett.,
vol. 20, pp. 1–5, 2023.
[37] W. Li et al., “Aligning semantic distribution in fusing optical and SAR
images for land use classification,” ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens.,
vol. 199, pp. 272–288, May 2023.
[38] X. Zheng, L. Huan, G.-S. Xia, and J. Gong, “Parsing very high resolution
urban scene images by learning deep ConvNets with edge-aware loss,”
ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens., vol. 170, pp. 15–28, Dec. 2020.
[39] L. Zhu, X. Wang, Z. Ke, W. Zhang, and R. W. Lau, “BiFormer: Vision
transformer with bi-level routing attention,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023, pp. 10323–10333.
[40] M. Tan, R. Pang, and Q. V. Le, “EfficientDet: Scalable and efficient
object detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 10778–10787.
[41] M. Lin, “Network in network,” 2013, arXiv:1312.4400.
[42] V. Christlein, L. Spranger, M. Seuret, A. Nicolaou, P. Král, and A. Maier,
“Deep generalized max pooling,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Document Anal.
Recognit. (ICDAR), Sep. 2019, pp. 1090–1096.
[43] C. Hazirbas, L. Ma, C. Domokos, and D. Cremers, “Fusenet:
Incorporating depth into semantic segmentation via fusion-based CNN
architecture,” in Computer Vision—ACCV 2016, S.-H. Lai, V. Lepetit,
K. Nishino, and Y. Sato, Eds. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2017,
pp. 213–228.
[44] X. Xu, W. Li, Q. Ran, Q. Du, L. Gao, and B. Zhang, “Multisource remote
sensing data classification based on convolutional neural network,” IEEE
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 56, no. 2, pp. 937–949, Feb. 2018.
[45] E. Xie et al., “Segformer: Simple and efficient design for semantic
segmentation with transformers,” 2021, arXiv:2105.15203.
[46] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for
image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), 2016, pp. 770–778.
[47] I. Vaihingen, “2D semantic labeling dataset,” Dryad Repository,
Tech. Rep., 2018.
[48] M. Gerke, “Use of the stair vision library within the ISPRS 2D semantic
labeling benchmark (Vaihingen),” Enschede, The Netherlands, 2015.
[49] T. Hanyu et al., “AerialFormer: multi-resolution transformer for aerial
image segmentation,” Remote Sens., vol. 16, no. 16, p. 2930, Aug. 2024.
[50] L. Fan, Y. Zhou, H. Liu, Y. Li, and D. Cao, “Combining
Swin transformer with UNet for remote sensing image semantic
segmentation,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023,
Art. no. 5530111.
[51] I. Potsdam, “2d semantic labeling dataset,” Dryad Repository, 2018.
[52] H. Almarzouqi and L. Saad Saoud, “Semantic labeling of high-resolution
images using EfficientUNets and transformers,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 4402913.
[53] X. Ma, X. Zhang, M.-O. Pun, and M. Liu, “A multilevel multimodal
fusion transformer for remote sensing semantic segmentation,” IEEE
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5403215.
[54] A. Paszke et al., “Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep
learning library,” 2019, arXiv:1912.01703.
[55] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
2014, arXiv:1412.6980.

ZHAO et al.: CFFormer FOR THE SEMANTIC SEGMENTATION OF MULTISOURCE REMOTE SENSING IMAGES

[56] L.-C. Chen, Y. Zhu, G. Papandreou, F. Schroff, and H. Adam,
“Encoder–decoder with atrous separable convolution for semantic image
segmentation,” in Computer Vision—ECCV 2018, V. Ferrari, M. Hebert,
C. Sminchisescu, and Y. Weiss, Eds. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2018,
pp. 833–851.
[57] X. Chen et al., “Bi-directional cross-modality feature propagation with
separation-and-aggregation gate for RGB-D semantic segmentation,” in
Computer Vision—ECCV 2020, A. Vedaldi, H. Bischof, T. Brox, and
J.-M. Frahm, Eds. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2020, pp. 561–577.
[58] H. Hosseinpour, F. Samadzadegan, and F. D. Javan, “CMGFNet: A deep
cross-modal gated fusion network for building extraction from very highresolution remote sensing images,” ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens.,
vol. 184, pp. 96–115, Feb. 2022.
[59] J. Zhang, H. Liu, K. Yang, X. Hu, R. Liu, and R. Stiefelhagen,
“CMX: Cross-modal fusion for RGB-X semantic segmentation with
transformers,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 12,
pp. 14679–14694, Dec. 2023.
[60] X. Yang et al., “An attention-fused network for semantic segmentation
of very-high-resolution remote sensing imagery,” ISPRS J. Photogramm.
Remote Sens., vol. 177, pp. 238–262, Jul. 2021.
[61] P. Olofsson, G. M. Foody, M. Herold, S. V. Stehman, C. E. Woodcock,
and M. A. Wulder, “Good practices for estimating area and assessing
accuracy of land change,” Remote Sens. Environ., vol. 148, pp. 42–57,
Mar. 2014.
[62] K. Nogueira, M. D. Mura, J. Chanussot, W. R. Schwartz, and
J. A. Dos Santos, “Dynamic multicontext segmentation of remote
sensing images based on convolutional networks,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 57, no. 10, pp. 7503–7520, Oct. 2019.
[63] X. Li, L. Xie, C. Wang, J. Miao, H. Shen, and L. Zhang,
“Boundary-enhanced dual-stream network for semantic segmentation
of high-resolution remote sensing images,” GIScience Remote Sens.,
vol. 61, no. 1, Dec. 2024, Art. no. 2356355.
[64] R. Child, S. Gray, A. Radford, and I. Sutskever, “Generating long
sequences with sparse transformers,” 2019, arXiv:1904.10509.
[65] P.-T. Jiang, C.-B. Zhang, Q. Hou, M.-M. Cheng, and Y. Wei, “LayerCAM: Exploring hierarchical class activation maps for localization,”
IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 30, pp. 5875–5888, 2021.
[66] A. Zheng, J. He, M. Wang, C. Li, and B. Luo, “Category-wise
fusion and enhancement learning for multimodal remote sensing image
semantic segmentation,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60,
2022, Art. no. 4416212.
[67] W. Zhou, J. Jin, J. Lei, and J.-N. Hwang, “CEGFNet: Common
extraction and gate fusion network for scene parsing of remote
sensing images,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
Art. no. 5405110.
[68] W. Lin, Z. Wu, J. Chen, J. Huang, and L. Jin, “Scale-aware modulation
meet transformer,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV),
2023, pp. 5992–6003.

Jinqi Zhao (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
degree in photogrammetry and remote sensing from
Wuhan University, Wuhan, China, in 2018.
He is currently an Associate Professor with the
School of Environment and Spatial Informatics,
China University of Mining and Technology,
Xuzhou, China. His research interests include synthetic aperture radar (SAR) intelligent interpretation
and its applications in target recognition, semantic segmentation, change detection, and wetland
monitoring.

Ming Zhang received the B.S. degree in surveying
and mapping engineering from Anhui University,
Hefei, China, in 2021, and the M.S. degree in
photogrammetry and remote sensing from China
University of Mining and Technology, Xuzhou,
China, in 2024.
His research interests include deep learning and
remote sensing image processing.

4401117

Zhonghuai Zhou received the B.S. degree from
Central South University of Forestry and Technology, Changsha, China, in 2023. He is currently
pursuing the M.S. degree with China University of
Mining and Technology, Xuzhou, China.
His research interests include remote sensing
image processing and semantic segmentation.

Zixuan Wang (Graduate Student Member, IEEE)
received the B.S. degree from Henan Polytechnic
University, Jiaozuo, China, in 2023. She is currently
pursuing the M.S. degree with China University of
Mining and Technology, Xuzhou, China.
Her research interests include multisource
long-time remote sensing images for wetland
monitoring and influencing factors analysis.

Fengkai Lang received the B.S. degree from China
University of Petroleum (Huadong), Dongying,
China, in 2008, and the Ph.D. degree from Wuhan
University, Wuhan, China, in 2014.
Since July 2014, he has been a Lecturer and an
Associate Professor with the School of Environment
Science and Spatial Informatics, China University
of Mining and Technology, Xuzhou, China. His
research interests include polarimetric SAR image
processing and interpretation, soil moisture retrieval,
disaster monitoring, and remote sensing of mining
environments.

Hongtao Shi (Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
degree in geographic information systems and the
M.S. degree in surveying and mapping from China
University of Petroleum (East China), Qingdao,
China, in 2014 and 2017, respectively, and the
Ph.D. degree in photogrammetry and remote sensing
from the State Key Laboratory of Information
Engineering, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China, in
June 2021.
From October 2019 to November 2020, he was
a Visiting Ph.D. Student with the University of
Alicante, Alicante, Spain. He is currently working as a Lecturer with China
University of Mining and Technology, Xuzhou, China. His research interests
include surface and crop parameter estimation from polarimetric synthetic
aperture radar imagery.

Nanshan Zheng (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
degree in urban environment from Kyoto University,
Kyoto, Japan, in 2009.
He is currently a Full Professor with the School
of Environment and Spatial Informatics, China
University of Mining and Technology, Xuzhou,
China. He has authored or co-authored more than
80 peer-reviewed journals or conference papers. His
research interests include GNSS signal processing
and remote sensing, as well as remote sensing of
environment and disaster.

