IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

5600213

Boundary-Aware Feature Fusion With Dual-Stream
Attention for Remote Sensing Small
Object Detection
Jingnan Song , Mingliang Zhou , Senior Member, IEEE, Jun Luo , Huayan Pu , Yong Feng,
Xuekai Wei , and Weijia Jia , Fellow, IEEE
Abstract— Detecting small objects in remote sensing images
poses significant challenges to the field of computer vision, primarily stemming from the complexity of backgrounds, limitations
in pixel resolution, and information loss during the feature fusion
process. While general object detection has significantly advanced
in recent years, remote sensing small object detection remains an
unsolved problem, with existing frameworks struggling to achieve
high performance at small scales. In this article, we propose a
novel framework called the boundary-aware feature fusion network (BAFNet), which significantly enhances the model’s ability
to represent and locate small objects precisely within complex
remote sensing scenarios. First, a dual-stream attention fusion
module captures complementary foreground and background
cues through bidirectional context modeling. Jointly attending to
objects and their surroundings enhances discriminative power
for distinguishing small objects. Additionally, we incorporate
a boundary-aware branch to better preserve crucial detailed
information vital for small-scale objects. This auxiliary component supervises the fusion of contextual semantics and spatial
information, aiding in retaining critical boundary details that
are prone to loss during cross-layer feature fusion. We conducted
experiments on the challenging AI-TOD, VisDrone, DIOR, and
LEVIR-Ship datasets. The results demonstrate the superiority of
Received 22 July 2024; revised 29 September 2024 and 14 November
2024; accepted 5 December 2024. Date of publication 9 December 2024;
date of current version 19 December 2024. This work was supported in
part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant
62176027, in part by the Key Projects of Basic Strengthening Plan under
Grant 2022-JCJQ-ZD-018-11, in part by Chongqing Talent under Grant
cstc2024ycjh-bgzxm0082, in part by the Joint Equipment Pre Research and
Key Fund Project of the Ministry of Education under Grant 8091B012207,
in part by the Human Resources and Social Security Bureau Project of
Chongqing under Grant cx2020073, in part by Guangdong Oppo Mobile
Telecommunications Corporation Ltd. under Grant H20240164, in part by the
Central University Operating Expenses under Grant 2024CDTGF-044, in part
by the Chongqing Natural Science Foundation Innovation and Development
Joint Fund under Grant CSTB2023NSCQ-LZX0109, in part by the Heavy
Rainfall Research Foundation of China under Grant BYKJ2024Z12, and in
part by the Key Project of Science and Technology Research Program of
Chongqing Education Commission of China under Grant KJZD-K202402501.
(Corresponding author: Mingliang Zhou.)
Jingnan Song, Mingliang Zhou, and Xuekai Wei are with the School
of Computer Science, Chongqing University, Chongqing 400044, China
(e-mail: sjn@stu.cqu.edu.cn; mingliangzhou@cqu.edu.cn; xuekaiwei2-c@
my.cityu.edu.hk).
Jun Luo and Huayan Pu are with the State Key Laboratory of Mechanical
Transmissions, Chongqing University, Chongqing 400044, China (e-mail:
luoj@cqu.edu.cn; phygood_2001@shu.edu.cn).
Yong Feng is with the School of Computer Science, Chongqing University,
Chongqing 400044, China, and also with the Heavy Rainfall Research Center
of China, Wuhan 430074, China (e-mail: yong.feng@foxmail.com).
Weijia Jia is with the BNU-UIC Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Future
Networks, Beijing Normal University at Zhuhai, Zhuhai 519087, China, and
also with the Guangdong Key Laboratory of AI and Multi-Modal Data
Processing, BNU-HKBU United International College, Zhuhai, Guangdong
519087, China (e-mail: jiawj@bnu.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TGRS.2024.3514376

our approach over other state-of-the-art (SOTA) object detection
methods, particularly in terms of precisely identifying small
objects within remote sensing images. The code is available at
https://github.com/ooo1128/BAFNet.
Index Terms— Boundary-aware, feature fusion, small object
detection.

I. I NTRODUCTION

S

MALL object detection in remote sensing imagery has
remained an important research focus, as it not only has
extremely high academic value but also has broad application
prospects in various domains, such as military reconnaissance, environmental monitoring, and urban planning. Its
goal is to accurately identify specific objects in images by
delineating their precise locations with bounding boxes and
further determining their categories. In recent years, deep
learning-based object detection models have been proposed
and have made significant progress. The accurate detection of
large- and medium-sized objects with high resolution and clear
appearance has been achieved in many applications. However,
small objects pose a significant challenge for detection because
of their limited pixel ratio and sparse and blurred appearance.
This characteristic makes it difficult to learn high-quality
representations of small objects, resulting in existing object
detection methods struggling to achieve the desired accuracy
when detecting and locating small objects.
In view of the difficulties in small object detection, several
studies have made important contributions to advancing the
field. Some studies [1], [2], [3], [4], [5] have employed feature
fusion methods to address the challenge of weak representation
capability for small objects at a single feature level, enhancing
the ability to capture and represent the characteristics of small
objects, thereby improving detection accuracy. Researchers
[6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11] have focused on modeling the
contextual relationships between small objects and their surrounding objects and environments. By capturing the inherent
dependencies and interactions, these methods aim to enrich
the representation of object features in images, leading to
improved accuracy in small object detection. Furthermore,
achieving balanced learning of all objects has been a key focus
in improving detection performance. Some works [12], [13]
have optimized label assignment strategies, enabling the model
to allocate appropriate labels for each object more accurately,
thus avoiding performance degradation caused by improper
label assignment. As a crucial postprocessing step, nonmaximum suppression (NMS) has also been extensively studied to

1558-0644 © 2024 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

5600213

enhance the detection of overlapping objects. By improving
the NMS algorithm, Luo et al. [14] effectively decreased false
and missed detections, thereby enhancing both the precision
and stability of the detection process.
Although the aforementioned methods have improved the
performance of small object detection, their application in the
field of remote sensing imagery still faces several limitations.
The backgrounds of remote sensing images often encompass
a wide variety of terrain and texture features, which can
significantly interfere with the detection of small objects.
Furthermore, small objects in high-resolution remote sensing
images are typically composed of only a handful of pixels,
resulting in blurred appearances and a lack of distinct internal features. Existing methods lack effective mechanisms to
enhance the focus and recognition of target regions and often
lose crucial detailed information during the feature extraction and fusion processes. This leads to unclear distinctions
between objects and backgrounds, thereby affecting detection
accuracy.
To address the aforementioned limitations, we propose a
boundary-aware feature fusion network (BAFNet). Through
a dual-stream attention mechanism and a boundary-aware
supervision strategy, our method can effectively differentiate
small objects from the background, enabling the precise detection of small objects in remote sensing images. Specifically,
we utilize high-level semantic features to generate dual-stream
attention maps, which are then combined with low-level spatial
features to capture more discriminative foreground and background cues, effectively mitigating the issue of small objects
being easily confused with the background. Furthermore,
the boundary-aware supervision strategy guides the model to
focus on boundary regions, effectively preventing the loss
of important boundary information during feature fusion and
subsequently enhancing the representation capabilities of the
objects.
The key achievements of this study can be summarized as
follows.
1) We propose a novel BAFNet object detection network
that can address the challenge of small objects easily
blending into complex backgrounds, resulting in poor
detection performance. Experiments conducted on the
AI-TOD, VisDrone, DIOR, and LEVIR-Ship datasets
demonstrate that our proposed method achieves stateof-the-art (SOTA) performance.
2) We propose a dual-stream attention mechanism that
leverages both foreground and background clues to
augment the representation of object regions. The
dual-stream attention module captures the mutually
dependent features between the object and its encompassing context in a complementary learning manner,
effectively capturing the salient features of small
objects while suppressing interference from complex
backgrounds.
3) We propose a boundary-aware supervision strategy that
uses boundary information to guide the fusion of
multiscale features, preserving fine-grained details and
helping to better distinguish objects of interest from
backgrounds, thereby more accurately localizing objects.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

The subsequent sections of this article are structured as follows. In Section II, we outline the related work. Section III
offers an overview and highlights of our proposed framework. In Section IV, we detail experimental evaluations on
the AI-TOD, VisDrone, DIOR, and LEVIR-Ship datasets.
Section V concludes the article on the basis of the research
findings and provides prospects for future studies.
II. R ELATED W ORK
A. Object Detection
Object detection in natural images has advanced significantly over the past decade and can be divided into
two-stage detectors and one-stage detectors. Two-stage detectors [15], [16], [17] operate sequentially, initially identifying
potential regions of interest (ROIs) through a region proposal stage. These ROIs then undergo classification and
localization via convolutional neural networks. Early iterations relied on low-level image features, but subsequent
advancements [18], [19] integrated region proposal networks
(RPNs) for end-to-end training, enhancing performance.
On the other hand, one-stage detectors [20], [21], [22], [23]
bypass the RoI extraction stage and directly classify and
regress bounding boxes via extracted convolutional features.
This approach offers the advantage of faster detection speeds,
making it well-suited for real-time applications. Recently,
anchor-free detectors [24], [25] have gained popularity. These
methods eliminate the need for manually defining anchor box
sizes and corresponding matching protocols instead of tuning
the detectors on the basis of the distribution of object scales
within images.
Despite significant advancements in general object detection, there is still a performance gap between detecting small
objects and detecting regular-sized objects because of the
inherent characteristics of small objects. First, small objects
are often confined to a handful of pixels, making extracting their informative features exceptionally challenging. This
limited feature information can lead to the loss of crucial
details, subsequently diminishing the detection accuracy. Second, small objects are prone to occlusion or concealment
within the background, hindering the ability of detectors to
identify and distinguish them accurately. Addressing these
challenges is crucial for narrowing the performance gap in
small object detection.
B. Small Object Detection in Remote Sensing Images
Feature pyramids have been widely employed in SOTA
detectors to facilitate the detection of objects at various
scales in remote sensing images. Lin et al. [1] introduced
the feature pyramid network (FPN) in 2017, which enables
detection algorithms to identify objects across various scales in
images by constructing multiscale feature maps, significantly
improving the accuracy of detecting small objects. Since then,
many methods have attempted to further improve the FPN,
such as PANet [2] and BiFPN [3]. Additionally, Cao et al. [26]
proposed a multibranch and high-level semantic network
(MHN) to address the issue of inconsistent semantic levels
among different layers of features, significantly increasing

SONG et al.: BOUNDARY-AWARE FEATURE FUSION WITH DUAL-STREAM ATTENTION

5600213

Fig. 1. Framework of our proposed method. In BAFNet, the DSAM enhances small object features by generating foreground and background attention maps
from high-level feature pyramid outputs. These attention maps are fused with spatial features to yield enhanced representations. Additionally, a boundary-aware
branch assists fusion via boundary loss, strengthening the preservation of object boundaries during small object detection. The dashed part of the figure is
involved only in the training process.

the performance of small object detection. Sun et al. [27]
proposed a high-resolution network (HRNet), which enhances
feature representations through repeated cross-stage partial
connections for multiscale fusion. Liu et al. [28] proposed
the adaptive structure feature fusion (ASFF), which adaptively
predicts the weights of features at different stages in the refusion process through an adaptive mechanism. Wang et al. [29]
introduced pyramid pooling to improve the efficiency of
feature fusion between adjacent layers. Ghiasi et al. [30]
explored the optimal combination of feature fusion across
layers via AutoML. Qiao et al. [31] proposed a novel object
detection framework DetectoRS, which significantly improves
detection performance by introducing a recursive feature
pyramid (RFP) at the macrolevel and a switchable atrous
convolution at the microlevel. Wu et al. [32] introduced a
feature-and-spatial aligned network (FSANet), which incorporates a feature-aware alignment module to enhance multiscale
features and a spatial-aware guidance head to iteratively refine
object localization. This addresses the issues of feature scarcity
and subpar localization in detecting minute objects within
remote sensing imagery. Zhou et al. [33] proposed an adaptive online training sample mining strategy that incorporates
task-level attention to guide the model in selectively choosing
suitable features for classification or regression tasks, thereby
improving detection performance for small objects.
The aforementioned methods have further improved the
effectiveness of feature fusion in various ways. However,
these methods generally overlook the importance of boundary

detail information. Specifically, for small objects, directly
fusing high-level semantic context information with
low-level spatial information may lead to issues such as
boundary-blurring or over-erosion. This results in the loss of
detailed features, ultimately affecting detection performance.
III. M ETHODOLOGY
In remote sensing images, small objects are prone to blending with the background owing to their low pixel ratio, making
it difficult to extract discriminative features. To improve
detection accuracy, we propose an effective detection framework, BAFNet, which is specifically designed for small object
detection. The core of this framework lies in the use of a
dual-stream attention mechanism to capture foreground and
background cues for extracting distinctive object features and
the introduction of image boundary information as auxiliary
supervision to increase performance. The framework of our
method is shown in Fig. 1. First, the input image is fed into
the backbone and neck to extract multiscale feature maps.
Then, the dual-stream attention module fuses the highest-level
semantic features with low-level spatial features to distinguish the foreground from the background, obtaining more
discriminative features. All feature maps of different scales
are subsequently input into the detection head, which predicts the final category and bounding box of the objects.
During training, the enhanced low-level features are fed into
the boundary head to predict the boundary. Moreover, the
boundary-aware branch extracts boundary information from

5600213

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

the input image as the ground truth, which is used together
with the predicted boundary in network training to further
improve the performance of small object detection.
A. Backbone and Neck
The input image I first passes through the backbone and
neck, outputting multiscale feature maps of different resolutions, labeled Pi (i = 0, 1, 2, 3, 4). In our method, we adopt
pretrained ResNet50 [34] as the backbone network for extracting multiscale features of the image, whereas the RFP [31]
serves as the neck network responsible for the feature fusion
process.

Fig. 2.

Dilated convolution. “d” denotes the rate of dilation.

Fig. 3.

Boundary aggregation.

B. Dual-Stream Attention Module
The dual-stream attention module aims to distinguish the
foreground from background regions, obtaining more discriminative features, as shown in Fig. 1. Given that semantic
information enables a better understanding of the context
and relationships between different objects and regions in an
image, it is crucial for accurately differentiating objects from
the background. Consequently, we utilize the richest semantic
top-level feature P4 to generate the foreground priority attention map (FPAM), which emphasizes the foreground of the
object. Following sigmoid activation, we subtract the FPAM
from an all-one matrix E to generate the background priority
attention map (BPAM):
(
A F = σ (U (conv(P4 )))
(1)
AB = E − AF
where A F represents FPAM, A B represents BPAM, U (·) represents upsampling, conv(·) is the convolution operation, where
a 1 × 1 convolution kernel is used, and σ (·) is a sigmoid
function.
We then weight fuse FPAM and BPAM with low-level feature P0 to further incorporate fine-grained details, enhancing
the representation of small objects in the feature map and
making them more discriminative. Notably, to enhance the
perception ability for small objects, we introduce multiscale
convolution to capture the global object region
 4

 4
Di P0 ⊙ A F , ⊔i=1
Di P0 ⊙ A B
E0 = L ⊔i=1
(2)


S0 = E 0 , P0
(3)
where ⊙ denotes elementwise multiplication. ⊔ denotes the
concatenation operation. D1 is composed of 1 × 1 kernels
4
with 256 channels, followed by a ReLU layer. {Di }i=2
is a
set of dilated convolutions with rates of 3, 5, and 7, as shown
in Fig. 2. They all have 3 × 3 kernels with 256 channels
followed by a ReLU layer. The two branches do not share
parameters. [·, ·] denotes concatenation. L represents the output layer, where the concatenated features are passed through a
3 × 3 kernel and ReLU layer to generate enhanced features S0 .
C. Boundary-Aware Auxiliary Branch
The purpose of the boundary-aware auxiliary branch is
to use boundary information to supervise the fusion of

spatial details and semantic context, preventing the loss of
fine-grained details of small objects during cross-scale feature
fusion. We generate binary boundary ground truths via the
boundary aggregation module, as shown in Fig. 1. Given the
broad coverage, diverse objects, and varying scales in remote
sensing images, capturing multiscale boundary features is particularly crucial. Therefore, we employ the Laplacian operator
to extract boundary features at different strides, constructing a
Laplacian pyramid to obtain multiscale boundary information,
as illustrated in Fig. 3
r1 = L 1 (gd )
r2 = L 2 (gd )
r4 = L 4 (gd )

(4)

where gd is the input image after grayscale conversion.
L i represents Laplacian convolution with a downsampling
stride of i, which consists of a 2-D convolution and a
trainable 1 × 1 convolution. The multiscale boundary representations ri (i = 1, 2, 4) obtained from gd are concatenated as
follows:
g p = [r1 , U (r2 ), U (r4 )]

(5)

where U represents the upsampling operation, the multiscale
boundary representations ri (i = 1, 2, 4) are adjusted to the
same dimension via bilinear interpolation and concatenated
into a boundary feature map g p .
Afterward, we resize the boundary feature maps to their
original dimensions and adaptively adjust their weights
through integration with a learnable 1 × 1 convolutional

SONG et al.: BOUNDARY-AWARE FEATURE FUSION WITH DUAL-STREAM ATTENTION

layer
f b = conv g p .


(6)

Finally, we convert the predicted boundary maps f b to the
final binary boundary ground truth via a threshold of 0.1.
Moreover, we introduce an additional boundary detection
head to predict boundaries. Then, the obtained boundary
ground truth is used as guidance to instruct the network in
learning to preserve the boundary details of the objects.
D. Loss Function
We optimize the detection branch and boundary branch
concurrently. The total loss function is defined as follows:
L = αLb + Lcls + Lreg

(7)

where Lcls and Lreg are the original classification loss and
regression loss of the detection head, respectively. Lb is the
loss of the boundary branch, and the parameter α is used to
scale its weight.
1) Boundary Loss: Since rough boundaries can better highlight the boundary regions of small objects and enhance
their feature representation, we employ the weighted binary
cross-entropy loss function for optimizing boundary learning.
This loss function assigns different weights to pixels at different positions on the feature map, with higher weights assigned
to pixels at the boundary positions and lower weights assigned
to pixels farther from the boundary. Therefore, the boundary
loss L b can be expressed as
Lb
P H PW
=−

i=1

j=1



P 1
1+γ αi j
l=0 1 gi j =l log Pr pi j = l | 9
P H PW
j=1 γ αi j
i=1
(8)

where 1(·) denotes an indicator function, while γ serves as
a tunable hyperparameter. The symbol l takes on values of
0 or 1, signifying two distinct label categories. pi j and gi j
represent the predicted and actual values, respectively, for the
pixel located at (i, j) in the image. The collective parameters
of the model are denoted by 9, and Pr( pi j = l | 9)
signifies the predicted probability of the pixel belonging to
label l.
The complete process of BAFNet is shown in Algorithm 1.
We use ResNet and RFP for multiscale feature extraction and
fusion, obtaining features Vi (i = 0, 1, 2, 3, 4) at different
scales. To enhance the foreground representation of small
objects, we further fuse the highest-level feature f 4 with
rich semantic information and the low-level feature f 0 containing more spatial details through the dual-stream attention
module (DSAM) module, obtaining the enhanced feature S0 .
We extract the boundary features X b of the input image I via a
Laplacian pyramid, input S0 into the boundary head to obtain
the predicted boundaries bd, and compute the loss between
them to supervise the aforementioned fusion process. Finally,
S0 and Pi (i = 1, 2, 3, 4) are fed into the detection head to
obtain the object detection results in (cls, box).

5600213

Algorithm 1 Algorithm for BAFNet
Input: Images and their corresponding annotations.
Output: Position and label of the object in the image.
1 Let Vi (i = 0, 1, 2, 3, 4) denote the multiscale features
extracted by ResNet, Pi (i = 0, 1, 2, 3, 4) represent the
multiscale features fused by RFP, I denote the input,
D H ead denote the object detection head, and Bhead
denote the boundary detection head.
2 for epoch=1 to E do
3
Vi = Res N et (I );
4
Pi = R F P(Vi );
5
S0 = DS AM(P0 , P4 );
6
X l = (S0 , P1 , P2 , P3 , P4 );
7
X b = Laplacian(I );
8
bd = B H ead(X l );
9
cls, box = D H ead(X l ).
10 end

IV. E XPERIMENT
A. Experimental Setup
1) Datasets: To demonstrate the effectiveness of our
approach, we conduct experiments on four datasets:
AI-TOD [43], VisDrone2019 [63], DIOR [64], and LEVIRShip [61].
AI-TOD is an optical remote sensing dataset specifically
designed for small object detection. It consists of a total
of 28 036 images with a size of 800 × 800 pixels, split
into training (11 214), validation (2804), and testing (14 018)
sets. AI-TOD encompasses eight common object categories,
namely, airplanes (AIs), bridges (BRs), storage tanks (STs),
ships (SHs), swimming pools (SPs), vehicles (VEs), people (PEs), and windmills (WMs). The AI-TOD dataset
features an average object size of 12.8 pixels, which is
markedly smaller than benchmarks in natural scenes such
as MS COCO [65] (99.5 pixels) and PASCAL VOC [66]
(156.6 pixels). This small object size poses great challenges
for object detection algorithms when they are applied to optical
remote sensing imagery.
The VisDrone2019 dataset focuses on scenes captured by
unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), encompassing a total of
8599 images. The dataset is divided into training, validation,
and test sets, containing 6471, 548, and 1580 images, respectively. It provides annotations for 11 different classes, namely,
pedestrian, people, bicycle, car, van, truck, tricycle, awningtricycle, bus, motor, and others (representing nonvalid object
regions). One of the unique strengths of the VisDrone dataset
lies in its diversity in terms of locations, environments, objects,
and densities.
DIOR is a dataset specifically designed for object detection in optical remote sensing images. It contains 23 463
images and 192 472 object instances, covering 20 object
categories such as airplane (APL), airport (APO), baseball
field (BF), basketball court (BC), bridge (BR), chimney (CH),
dam (DAM), expressway service area (ESA), expressway toll
station (ETS), golf course (GC), ground track field (GTF),
harbor (HA), overpass (OP), ship (SH), stadium (STA),

5600213

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

storage tank (STO), tennis court (TC), train station (TS), vehicle (VE), and windmill (WM). This dataset is large in scale in
terms of the number of object categories, the number of object
instances, and the total number of images. It features a wide
range of object sizes, diverse image variations, high interclass
similarity, and intraclass diversity, providing comprehensive
challenges for object detection in remote sensing images.
The LEVIR-Ship dataset is a large-scale dataset specifically
tailored for the detection of tiny ships in remote sensing
images. It contains 3896 images, each with a resolution of
512 × 512 pixels, encompassing over 3000 instances of tiny
ships. The pixel size of the ship objects is mostly less than
20 × 20 and is concentrated around 10 × 10, making it
particularly suitable for the task of small object detection in
remote sensing scenarios.
2) Implementation Details: We implemented our method on
the PyTorch framework [67] and MMDetection [68]. We followed the default data augmentation settings in MMdetection.
We chose DetectoRS [31] as the detector of our proposed
model and adopted the RFLA [13] label assignment strategy.
Optimization was performed via the SGD optimizer, which
was configured with a momentum of 0.9 and a weight decay
factor of 0.0001. We set the batch size to 2 and set the
learning rate to 0.005. Additionally, we set the RPN proposal number to 3000. For the experiments on the AI-TOD
dataset, we train for 36 epochs, which decay at the 24th
and 33th epochs. We trained for 12 epochs on the VisDrone, DIOR, and LEVIR-Ship datasets, with learning rate
decay applied at the 8th and 11th epochs. During inference,
background bounding boxes were filtered out using a confidence threshold of 0.05, and NMS was applied with an IoU
threshold of 0.5, limiting the maximum number of bounding
boxes to 3000. In the loss function 7, we set the balance
factor as α = 0.5.
3) Evaluation Metrics: To evaluate the proposed detection
algorithm, we employed the same evaluation metrics as outlined in MS COCO [65] and used the average precision (AP)
metric to assess the algorithm’s performance. The AP metric
is formally defined as
Z 1
AP =
P(r )dr
(9)
0

where r signifies the recall rate and where P(r ) represents the
precision at a given recall level. The recall rate and precision
are derived via the following equations:
TP
TP + FN
TP
Precision =
TP + FP
Recall =

(10)
(11)

where true positive (TP) refers to the number of correctly
matched samples under different IoU thresholds, false positive (FP) represents the number of incorrectly matched
samples, and false negative (FN) denotes the number of missed
samples.
We also calculate the detection scores of objects under
different thresholds. Specifically, AP50 represents the AP calculated when the IoU threshold for defining the TP is 0.5.

AP75 represents the AP calculated when the IoU threshold
is 0.75. The AP is defined as the mean of AP50 to AP95 ,
where the IoU thresholds vary from 0.5 to 0.95 with a step
of 0.05 when the TP is computed for computing the metric.
In addition, we calculate the detection scores for objects of
different volumes to determine the performance of our method
in detecting small objects. APvt refers to the AP calculated for
objects with a volume smaller than 82 pixels. APt refers to the
AP for objects with a volume between 82 and 162 pixels. APs
refers to the AP for objects with a volume between 162 and
322 pixels. APm refers to the AP for objects with a volume
greater than 322 pixels.
B. Comparison With SOTA Methods
To assess the effectiveness of the proposed BAFNet,
we conducted a comparative evaluation against leading object
detection models on the AI-TOD, VisDrone, DIOR, and
LEVIR-Ship datasets, including several remote sensing algorithms renowned for their SOTA capability in detecting small
objects.
1) Experiment on AI-TOD: Table I shows the experimental results of BAFNet compared with those of other SOTA
detectors on the AI-TOD dataset. Specifically, these detectors
include some of the most advanced methods for remote
sensing images [32], [33], [44], [45], [46], as well as other
leading detectors designed for general CV tasks. Our method
achieves the best detection performance, with an AP of 30.5.
Notably, our method demonstrates a significant advantage in
detecting very tiny objects, achieving an APvt of 16.6%, which
is a 3.8% increase over the SOTA methods. This indicates that
our method excels in addressing the challenge of detecting
small objects in remote sensing scenarios.
As evident in Table I, the performance of the general detectors is below 7 APvt , with some even achieving 0 APvt . We attribute the reasons to the following two
points.
1) Most models are trained on a commonly used COCO
dataset where the number of small objects is limited,
and the models are targeted for general object detection. Therefore, their performance is not satisfactory
for AI-TOD.
2) During the process of feature extraction and fusion, it is
highly prone to losing fine-grained feature information
of very small objects, leading to poor performance
in the APvt metric. In comparison, our method can
achieve higher AP values, especially APvt , while still
maintaining good performance in detecting medium- and
large-sized objects.
Fig. 4 shows a series of qualitative detection results across
diverse scenes, underscoring the efficacy of our method in
detecting small objects, including extremely tiny objects.
Within urban environments, our method can accurately identify small objects such as vehicles and tanks, even when they
are densely occluded or in cluttered backgrounds. In natural
landscapes, our method demonstrates exemplary performance
in detecting tiny objects in complex terrains. Aerial images
show that our method is capable of identifying aircraft hidden

SONG et al.: BOUNDARY-AWARE FEATURE FUSION WITH DUAL-STREAM ATTENTION

5600213

TABLE I
R ESULTS OF O UR P ROPOSED BAFN ET C OMPARED W ITH T HOSE OF SOTA A PPROACHES ON THE AI-TOD DATASET.
R ED AND B LUE : T OP T WO P ERFORMANCES

Fig. 4.

Qualitative results of our method on the AI-TOD datasets.

in clouds, despite their small proportions. Across these challenging scenarios, the proposed method exhibits robust small

object detection capabilities, demonstrating its effectiveness in
environments with complex backgrounds.

5600213

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

Fig. 5. Qualitative comparison plot of the VisDrone dataset. (a) Original input image. (b) Heatmap of the bottom features of the baseline. (c) Heatmap of
the bottom features of BAFNet.
TABLE II
R ESULTS OF O UR P ROPOSED BAFN ET C OMPARED W ITH T HOSE OF SOTA
A PPROACHES ON THE V IS D RONE DATASET. R ED AND B LUE :
T OP T WO P ERFORMANCES

2) Experiment on VisDrone: Table II provides a detailed
performance comparison of our method and several SOTA
approaches on the VisDrone validation set. For two-stage
detectors, we compared BAFNet against Cascade R-CNN [17],
Faster R-CNN [18], PANet [2], CMDNet [49], and QueryDet [50]. Additionally, we compared our approach with onestage detectors, including RetinaNet [20], AutoAssign [36],
GFL V1 [47], CenterNet [24], and YOLOF [48]. Furthermore, a comprehensive evaluation of performance was conducted against transformer-based object detectors DINO [51],
RT-DETR [52], and EF-DETR [53]. The results indicate

that BAFNet outperforms the other methods in terms of all
metrics. Notably, BAFNet achieves an AP value of 30.8%,
surpassing that of CMDNet, the top performer, by 1.6% points,
demonstrating its superiority in terms of detection accuracy.
Particularly in detecting small objects, BAFNet achieved an
APs value of 22.4%, outperforming DINO, the next best
performer, by 4.9 percentage points, showcasing BAFNet’s
strength in handling tasks related to small object detection.
Additionally, visual comparisons of different methods are
shown in Figs. 5 and 6. In Fig. 5, we visualize the heatmaps
of the baseline and our method for better analysis and
understanding of the advantages of our method. Specifically,
compared with the baseline, our method more effectively
focuses attention on foreground objects and significantly
enhances the response intensity of small objects. Further
observation of Fig. 6 clearly demonstrates the exceptional
accuracy of our BAFNet in detecting small objects, effectively addressing the challenges posed by scale variations.
The regions highlighted by yellow dashed lines particularly
emphasize BAFNet’s powerful ability in small object detection, accurately identifying and locating small objects that are
often missed or difficult to detect by other methods. Moreover,
the regions marked by red dashed lines also validate the superior performance of BAFNet in detecting occluded objects.
In these regions, the objects are often partially occluded by
other objects or complex backgrounds, which increases the
difficulty of detection. Nevertheless, our BAFNet successfully
captures occluded objects by integrating information through
the proposed boundary-aware attention fusion strategy. These
phenomena not only prove the effectiveness of BAFNet in
performing small object detection tasks but also demonstrate
its ability to handle complex scenes and challenging objects.

SONG et al.: BOUNDARY-AWARE FEATURE FUSION WITH DUAL-STREAM ATTENTION

5600213

Fig. 6. Qualitative comparison results. The bright yellow and red dashed boxes show the superior performance of our method at detecting small-scale objects.
(a) Ground truth. (b) Faster RCNN. (c) Baseline. (d) Ours.
TABLE III
R ESULTS OF O UR P ROPOSED BAFN ET C OMPARED W ITH T HOSE OF SOTA A PPROACHES ON THE DIOR DATASET.
R ED AND B LUE : T OP T WO P ERFORMANCES

3) Experiment on DIOR: Table III provides a detailed
comparison of the performance of BAFNet with that of other
methods on the DIOR dataset. An analysis of the table clearly
reveals that BAFNet achieves the highest scores in multiple
categories. Particularly in dealing with challenging categories
such as expressway-toll-stations (ETSs) and windmills (WMs),
where features are relatively subtle, BAFNet outperforms the
other methods in terms of performance. Additionally, BAFNet
maintained competitive performance in other categories.
Compared with other SOTA detectors, our method achieves a
combined performance mAP of 78.1%, which is 1.9% greater
than that of the second-ranking SDPNet [60]. These results
indicate that BAFNet demonstrates robustness and generalization capabilities when handling complex backgrounds and
diverse object detection tasks.

TABLE IV
R ESULTS OF O UR P ROPOSED BAFN ET C OMPARED W ITH T HOSE OF
SOTA A PPROACHES ON THE LEVIR-S HIP DATASET

4) Experiment on LEVIR-Ship: As shown in Table IV, our
proposed BAFNet achieves an AP50 of 84.2% on the LEVIRShip dataset, surpassing other SOTA methods. In particular,

5600213

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

TABLE V
A BLATION E XPERIMENTS ON THE V IS D RONE VALIDATION S ET. DSAM I NDICATES THE D UAL -S TREAM ATTENTION M ODULE . BAB I NDICATES THE
B OUNDARY-AWARE B RANCH . T HE B OLD F ONT I NDICATES THE B EST R ESULT

compared with methods such as Efficient-D0 [3], EfficientD2 [3], RetinaNet [20], FCOS [25], CenterNet [24], and Faster
R-CNN [18], BAFNet has a more pronounced performance
advantage. This proves that BAFNet is better at capturing
objects in various complex scenarios, thereby achieving higher
detection performance.

TABLE VI
C OMPARISON OF D IFFERENT F EATURE L AYERS OF DSAM ON V IS D RONE

C. Ablation Study
This section delves into ablation studies aimed at assessing the impact of individual components—the DSAM and
boundary-aware auxiliary branch (BAB)—on our approach.
Additionally, we explored and determined the optimal configuration for our approach. All the experiments in this section
are conducted on the VisDrone validation set.
1) Effectiveness of the Dual-Stream Attention Module:
We first evaluated the effectiveness of the proposed DSAM,
which captures more discriminative features of small objects.
As shown in Table V, by introducing the DSAM into the
baseline, the detection AP improves by 2.3% (from 27.0%
to 29.3%). AP50 increases by 6.1% (from 45.1% to 51.2%),
and the APs improve by 3.3% (from 17.7% to 21.0%).
The performance improvement is most significant for small
objects. This finding demonstrates that the loss of key detail
information about small objects during feature extraction and
fusion can degrade the detection performance. Our DSAM
leverages the highest-level semantic features to capture more
meaningful foreground and background cues, which are then
fused with low-level features rich in spatial details to enhance
object representation.
We conducted further investigations to explore different application strategies for the DSAM. In our method,
we leveraged high-level feature layers to generate FPAM and
BPAM, as these layers encapsulate richer semantic information
through multilayer convolution and pooling operations. This
semantic information is crucial for distinguishing the foreground from the background and recognizing target categories.
Furthermore, considering that small objects in remote sensing
images can be minute and risk being lost in the highest-level
feature layer P4 , we select the P3 and P4 feature layers
in our ablation study to determine the optimal strategy for
generating FPAMs. As shown in Table VI, when the P4 feature layer is used, our AP score peaks at 30.8%, with a
small object detection accuracy of 22.4%. This indicates that
the highest-level feature layer, P4 , provides highly discriminative feature representations for capturing foreground and
background cues. It effectively captures fine-grained details,

TABLE VII
C OMPARISON OF D IFFERENT B OUNDARY E XTRACTION M ETHODS FOR
THE B OUNDARY-AWARE B RANCH ON V IS D RONE . BAB I NDICATES
THE B OUNDARY AGGREGATION M ODULE

which are more conducive to small object detection tasks.
Therefore, we choose to utilize the P4 feature layer for
generating FPAM and BPAM.
2) Effectiveness of the Boundary-Aware Branch: After
introducing the boundary-aware branch into the baseline
model, the AP50 and AP on the VisDrone dataset improved by
6.5% and 2.7%, respectively, as shown in Table V (Row 3).
On this basis, the joint use of the DSAM module and
the boundary-aware auxiliary branch outperformed the use
of either method alone in terms of small object detection.
As presented in Table V (Row 4), the overall AP metric
increased by 3.8%, AP50 by 7.5%, and notably, APs (for
small objects) by 4.7%, demonstrating the effectiveness of the
boundary-aware branch in enhancing the detection accuracy of
small objects. By leveraging boundary information, the model
can retain more discriminative object features, which facilitates
more precise localization and identification of objects.
3) Effectiveness of the Boundary Aggregation Module:
In the boundary-aware branch, the boundary aggregation module is first utilized to extract boundaries. To validate the
effectiveness of the Laplacian pyramid, we compare it with the
commonly used edge detection method, Canny, as shown in
Table VII. The experimental results indicate that the Laplacian
pyramid method achieves better results across all the metrics.
We attribute this to its ability to extract multiscale boundary
information, which helps capture finer-grained details, thereby
enabling more precise detection.

SONG et al.: BOUNDARY-AWARE FEATURE FUSION WITH DUAL-STREAM ATTENTION

TABLE VIII
A BLATION E XPERIMENTS W ITH H YPERPARAMETER α ON
THE V IS D RONE DATASET

4) Analysis of Hyperparameters for Boundary Loss
Weights: In the training process, we employ the hyperparameter α to regulate the effect of the boundary loss. To validate the
impact of α on model performance, we conducted experiments
with various α settings. The detection results on the VisDrone
dataset are presented in Table VIII, indicating that as α
increases, the model’s detection performance generally tends
to first increase and then decrease. This could be attributed to
the fact that too small an α value results in an overly weak
contribution from the boundary loss, whereas an excessively
large α tends to dominate the overall loss, neglecting classification and detection losses, leading to a decrease in the AP.
Consequently, we choose to set α to 0.5, which achieves the
highest AP and APs .
V. C ONCLUSION
This article proposes BAFNet for the challenging task of
small object detection in remote sensing. Remote sensing
images often contain distant and low-resolution small objects.
The BAFNet framework incorporates several key components
specifically designed to enhance the detection capability of
small objects. The DSAM module improves the representation
of foreground features, capturing discriminative features of
small objects. The boundary-aware supervision strategy retains
detailed information, which is crucial for distinguishing small
objects from complex backgrounds. Evaluations conducted
on the AI-TOD, VisDrone, DIOR, and LEVIR-Ship datasets
demonstrate that BAFNet has significant advantages in terms
of detection accuracy, outperforming existing methods and
providing a powerful solution to the complex problem of small
object detection in remote sensing imagery. In the future,
we will continue to study the processing of noise and delve
into a detection algorithm that is more sensitive to small
objects.
R EFERENCES
[1] T. Y. Lin, P. Dollàr, R. Girshick, K. He, B. Hariharan, and S. Belongie,
“Feature pyramid networks for object detection,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jul. 2017, pp. 2117–2125.
[2] S. Liu, L. Qi, H. Qin, J. Shi, and J. Jia, “Path aggregation network for
instance segmentation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit., Jun. 2018, pp. 8759–8768.
[3] M. Tan, R. Pang, and Q. V. Le, “EfficientDet: Scalable and efficient
object detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 10781–10790.
[4] J. Li, H. Zhang, R. Song, W. Xie, Y. Li, and Q. Du, “Structureguided feature transform hybrid residual network for remote sensing
object detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
Art. no. 5610713.

5600213

[5] Y. Li, J. Luo, Y. Zhang, Y. Tan, J.-G. Yu, and S. Bai, “Learning
to holistically detect bridges from large-size VHR remote sensing
imagery,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 46, no. 12,
pp. 11507–11523, Dec. 2024.
[6] Z. Zhao, J. Du, C. Li, X. Fang, Y. Xiao, and J. Tang, “Dense tiny object
detection: A scene context guided approach and a unified benchmark,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5606913.
[7] J.-S. Lim, M. Astrid, H.-J. Yoon, and S.-I. Lee, “Small object detection
using context and attention,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Inf.
Commun. (ICAIIC), 2021, pp. 181–186.
[8] W. Shen, P. Qin, and J. Zeng, “An indoor crowd detection network
framework based on feature aggregation module and hybrid attention
selection module,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. Workshop
(ICCVW), Oct. 2019, pp. 82–90.
[9] K. Fu, J. Li, L. Ma, K. Mu, and Y. Tian, “Intrinsic relationship reasoning
for small object detection,” 2020, arXiv:2009.00833.
[10] L. V. Pato, R. Negrinho, and P. M. Q. Aguiar, “Seeing without looking:
Contextual rescoring of object detections for AP maximization,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020,
pp. 14610–14618.
[11] Y. Li et al., “STAR: A first-ever dataset and a large-scale benchmark for scene graph generation in large-size satellite imagery,” 2024,
arXiv:2406.09410.
[12] Z. Chen, C. Yang, Q. Li, F. Zhao, Z.-J. Zha, and F. Wu, “Disentangle
your dense object detector,” in Proc. 29th ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia.
New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, Oct. 2021,
pp. 4939–4948.
[13] C. Xu, J. Wang, W. Yang, H. Yu, L. Yu, and G.-S. Xia, “RFLA: Gaussian
receptive field based label assignment for tiny object detection,” in Proc.
Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2022, pp. 526–543.
[14] Z. Luo, Z. Fang, S. Zheng, Y. Wang, and Y. Fu, “NMS-loss: Learning
with non-maximum suppression for crowded pedestrian detection,” in
Proc. Int. Conf. Multimedia Retr., Aug. 2021, pp. 481–485.
[15] R. Girshick, “Fast R-CNN,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis.
(ICCV), Dec. 2015, pp. 1440–1448.
[16] K. He, G. Gkioxari, P. Dollár, and R. Girshick, “Mask R-CNN,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2017, pp. 2961–2969.
[17] Z. Cai and N. Vasconcelos, “Cascade R-CNN: Delving into high
quality object detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit., Salt Lake City, UT, USA, Jun. 2018, pp. 6154–6162, doi:
10.1109/CVPR.2018.00644.
[18] S. Ren, K. He, R. Girshick, and J. Sun, “Faster R-CNN: Towards realtime object detection with region proposal networks,” in Proc. Adv.
Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 28, Dec. 2015, pp. 91–99.
[19] R. Girshick, J. Donahue, T. Darrell, and J. Malik, “Rich feature
hierarchies for accurate object detection and semantic segmentation,”
in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2014,
pp. 580–587.
[20] T. Lin, P. Goyal, R. Girshick, K. He, and P. Dollár, “Focal loss for dense
object detection,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 42, no. 2,
pp. 318–327, Feb. 2020.
[21] W. Liu et al., “SSD: Single shot multibox detector,” in Proc. Eur. Conf.
Comput. Vis. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2016, pp. 21–37.
[22] J. Redmon, S. Divvala, R. Girshick, and A. Farhadi, “You only look
once: Unified, real-time object detection,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 779–788.
[23] J. Redmon and A. Farhadi, “YOLO9000: Better, faster, stronger,” in
Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jul. 2017,
pp. 7263–7271.
[24] K. Duan, S. Bai, L. Xie, H. Qi, Q. Huang, and Q. Tian, “CenterNet:
Keypoint triplets for object detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf.
Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019, pp. 6569–6578.
[25] Z. Tian, C. Shen, H. Chen, and T. He, “FCOS: Fully convolutional
one-stage object detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis.
(ICCV), Oct. 2019, pp. 9627–9636.
[26] J. Cao, Y. Pang, S. Zhao, and X. Li, “High-level semantic networks for
multi-scale object detection,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol.,
vol. 30, no. 10, pp. 3372–3386, Oct. 2020.
[27] K. Sun, B. Xiao, D. Liu, and J. Wang, “Deep high-resolution representation learning for human pose estimation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Long Beach, CA, USA. New York, NY,
USA: Computer Vision Foundation, Jun. 2019, pp. 5693–5703.
[28] S. Liu, D. Huang, and Y. Wang, “Learning spatial fusion for single-shot
object detection,” CoRR, vol. abs/1911.09516, pp. 1–10, Jan. 2019.

5600213

[29] X. Wang, S. Zhang, Z. Yu, L. Feng, and W. Zhang, “Scale-equalizing
pyramid convolution for object detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Seattle, WA, USA. New York,
NY, USA: Computer Vision Foundation, Jun. 2020, pp. 13356–13365.
[30] G. Ghiasi, T.-Y. Lin, and Q. V. Le, “NAS-FPN: Learning scalable
feature pyramid architecture for object detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Long Beach, CA,
USA. New York, NY, USA: Computer Vision Foundation, Jun. 2019,
pp. 7036–7045.
[31] S. Qiao, L.-C. Chen, and A. Yuille, “DetectoRS: Detecting objects with
recursive feature pyramid and switchable atrous convolution,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021,
pp. 10213–10224.
[32] J. Wu, Z. Pan, B. Lei, and Y. Hu, “FSANet: Feature-and-spatial-aligned
network for tiny object detection in remote sensing images,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5630717.
[33] Z. Zhou and Y. Zhu, “KLDet: Detecting tiny objects in remote sensing
images via Kullback–Leibler divergence,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 4703316.
[34] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for
image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 770–778.
[35] Y. Li, Y. Chen, N. Wang, and Z.-X. Zhang, “Scale-aware trident
networks for object detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput.
Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019, pp. 6054–6063.
[36] B. Zhu et al., “AutoAssign: Differentiable label assignment for dense
object detection,” CoRR, vol. abs/2007.03496, pp. 1–11, Jan. 2020.
[37] H. Zhang, H. Chang, B. Ma, N. Wang, and X. Chen, “Dynamic R-CNN:
Towards high quality object detection via dynamic training,” in Proc.
16th Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., in Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
vol. 12360, Glasgow, U.K., A. Vedaldi, H. Bischof, T. Brox, and
J. Frahm, Eds., Berlin, Germany: Springer, Nov. 2020, pp. 260–275.
[38] C. Feng, Y. Zhong, Y. Gao, M. R. Scott, and W. Huang, “TOOD:
Task-aligned one-stage object detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf.
Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Montreal, QC, Canada, Oct. 2021, pp. 3490–3499.
[39] S. Zhang, C. Chi, Y. Yao, Z. Lei, and S. Z. Li, “Bridging the gap between
anchor-based and anchor-free detection via adaptive training sample
selection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Seattle, WA, USA. New York, NY, USA: Computer Vision
Foundation, Jun. 2020, pp. 9756–9765.
[40] Z. Yang, S. Liu, H. Hu, L. Wang, and S. Lin, “RepPoints: Point
set representation for object detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf.
Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Seoul, South Korea, Oct. 2019, pp. 9656–9665.
[41] T. Kong, F. Sun, H. Liu, Y. Jiang, L. Li, and J. Shi, “FoveaBox: Beyound
anchor-based object detection,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 29,
pp. 7389–7398, 2020.
[42] J. Redmon and A. Farhadi, “YOLOv3: An incremental improvement,”
CoRR, vol. abs/1804.02767, pp. 1–6, Jan. 2018.
[43] J. Wang, W. Yang, H. Guo, R. Zhang, and G.-S. Xia, “Tiny object
detection in aerial images,” in Proc. 25th Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit.
(ICPR), Milan, Italy, Jan. 2021, pp. 3791–3798.
[44] T. Zhang et al., “Multistage enhancement network for tiny object
detection in remote sensing images,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5611512.
[45] H.-I. Liu, Y.-W. Tseng, K.-C. Chang, P.-J. Wang, H.-H. Shuai, and
W.-H. Cheng, “A DeNoising FPN with transformer R-CNN for tiny
object detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024,
Art. no. 4704415.
[46] L. Ge et al., “Regression-guided refocusing learning with feature alignment for remote sensing tiny object detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 4408314.
[47] X. Li et al., “Generalized focal loss: Learning qualified and distributed
bounding boxes for dense object detection,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
Inf. Process. Syst., Annu. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 33,
H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M. Balcan, and H. Lin, Eds.,
Dec. 2020, pp. 1–11.
[48] Q. Chen, Y. Wang, T. Yang, X. Zhang, J. Cheng, and J. Sun, “You
only look one-level feature,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit., Jun. 2021, pp. 13039–13048.
[49] C. Duan, Z. Wei, C. Zhang, S. Qu, and H. Wang, “Coarse-grained density
map guided object detection in aerial images,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int.
Conf. Comput. Vis. Workshops (ICCVW), Oct. 2021, pp. 2789–2798.
[50] C. Yang, Z. Huang, and N. Wang, “QueryDet: Cascaded sparse query for
accelerating high-resolution small object detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), New Orleans, LA, USA,
Jun. 2022, pp. 13658–13667.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

[51] H. Zhang et al., “DINO: DETR with improved denoising anchor boxes
for end-to-end object detection,” in Proc. The 11th Int. Conf. Learn.
Represent., Kigali, Rwanda, May 2023, pp. 1–19.
[52] Y. Zhao et al., “Detrs beat yolos on real-time object detection,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Seattle, WA,
USA, Jun. 2024, pp. 16965–16974.
[53] S. Cheng et al., “EF-DETR: A lightweight transformer-based object
detector with an encoder-free neck,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 20,
no. 11, pp. 12994–13002, Nov. 2024.
[54] Z. Huang, W. Li, X.-G. Xia, H. Wang, F. Jie, and R. Tao, “LO-Det:
Lightweight oriented object detection in remote sensing images,” IEEE
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5603515.
[55] D. Yu and S. Ji, “A new spatial-oriented object detection framework
for remote sensing images,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60,
2022, Art. no. 4407416.
[56] N. Liu, T. Celik, T. Zhao, C. Zhang, and H.-C. Li, “AFDet: Toward more
accurate and faster object detection in remote sensing images,” IEEE J.
Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 14, pp. 12557–12568,
2021.
[57] Y. Li, Q. Huang, X. Pei, Y. Chen, L. Jiao, and R. Shang, “Crosslayer attention network for small object detection in remote sensing
imagery,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 14,
pp. 2148–2161, 2021.
[58] G. Cheng, Y. Si, H. Hong, X. Yao, and L. Guo, “Cross-scale feature
fusion for object detection in optical remote sensing images,” IEEE
Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 431–435, Mar. 2021.
[59] G. Wang et al., “FSoD-Net: Full-scale object detection from optical
remote sensing imagery,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60,
2022, Art. no. 5602918.
[60] Y. Ma, L. Chai, and L. Jin, “Scale decoupled pyramid for object
detection in aerial images,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61,
2023, Art. no. 4704314.
[61] J. Chen, K. Chen, H. Chen, Z. Zou, and Z. Shi, “A degraded reconstruction enhancement-based method for tiny ship detection in remote
sensing images with a new large-scale dataset,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5625014.
[62] D. Liu, J. Zhang, Y. Qi, Y. Wu, and Y. Zhang, “Tiny object detection
in remote sensing images based on object reconstruction and multiple
receptive field adaptive feature enhancement,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5616213.
[63] D. Du et al., “VisDrone-DET2019: The vision meets drone object
detection in image challenge results,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf.
Comput. Vis. Workshop (ICCVW), Oct. 2019, pp. 213–226.
[64] K. Li, G. Wan, G. Cheng, L. Meng, and J. Han, “Object detection in
optical remote sensing images: A survey and a new benchmark,” ISPRS
J. Photogramm. Remote Sens., vol. 159, pp. 296–307, Jan. 2020.
[65] T. Lin et al., “Microsoft COCO: common objects in context,” in Proc.
13th Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., in Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
vol. 8693, Zürich, Switzerland, D. J. Fleet, T. Pajdla, B. Schiele, and
T. Tuytelaars, Eds., Berlin, Germany: Springer, Sep. 2014, pp. 740–755.
[66] M. Everingham, S. M. A. Eslami, L. Van Gool, C. K. I. Williams,
J. Winn, and A. Zisserman, “The PASCAL visual object classes challenge: A retrospective,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 111, no. 1, pp. 98–136,
Jan. 2015.
[67] A. Paszke et al., “PyTorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep
learning library,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 32,
Jan. 2019, pp. 1–12.
[68] K. Chen et al., “MMDetection: Open MMLab detection toolbox and
benchmark,” 2019, arXiv:1906.07155.

Jingnan Song received the bachelor’s degree in
computer science and technology from the College
of Information Technology, Hebei University of Economics and Business, Shijiazhuang, Hebei, China,
in 2021. She is currently pursuing the master’s
degree in electronic information with the School
of Computer Science and Technology, Chongqing
University, Chongqing, China.
At present, she is mainly engaged in research
on computer vision, object detection, and object
tracking. Her master’s thesis is research on weak
and small object detection and tracking algorithms in complex low-altitude
background environments.

SONG et al.: BOUNDARY-AWARE FEATURE FUSION WITH DUAL-STREAM ATTENTION

Mingliang Zhou (Senior Member, IEEE) received
the Ph.D. degree in computer science from Beihang
University, Beijing, China, in 2017.
He was a Post-Doctoral Researcher with the
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China, from
September 2017 to September 2019. He was a
Post-Doctoral Fellow with the State Key Laboratory
of Internet of Things for Smart City, University
of Macau, Macau, China, from October 2019 to
October 2021. He is currently an Associate Professor
with the School of Computer Science, Chongqing University, Chongqing,
China. His research interests include image and video coding, perceptual
image processing, multimedia signal processing, rate control, multimedia
communication, machine learning, and optimization.

Jun Luo received the B.S. and M.S. degrees
in mechanical engineering from Henan Polytechnic University, Jiaozuo, China, in 1994 and 1997,
respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in mechatronics
engineering from the Research Institute of Robotics,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China,
in 2000.
He is currently a Professor with the State Key Laboratory of Mechanical Transmissions, Chongqing
University, Chongqing, China. His research interests
include artificial intelligence, sensing technology,
and special robotics.

Huayan Pu received the M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in
mechatronics engineering from the Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China,
in 2007 and 2011, respectively.
She is currently a Professor with the State Key
Laboratory of Mechanical Transmissions, Chongqing University, Chongqing, China. Her research
interests include vibration control and robotics.
Dr. Pu was a recipient of the Best Paper Award
in Biomimetics at the 2013 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Biomimetics. She was also
nominated as the Best Conference Paper Finalist at the 2012 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Biomimetics.

5600213

Yong Feng received the Ph.D. degree in computer
science and technology from the College of Computer Science, Chongqing University, Chongqing,
China, in 2006.
He is currently a Professor with Chongqing University. His research interests include big data
analysis and data mining, artificial intelligence and
big data processing, deep learning, and big data
retrieval.

Xuekai Wei received the bachelor’s degree in electronic information science and technology and the
master’s degree in communication and information
systems from Shandong University, Jinan, China,
in 2014 and 2017, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree
in computer science from the City University of
Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China, in 2021.
He was a Post-Doctoral Fellow with the School
of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, China. He is currently an Associate
Professor with the School of Computer Science,
Chongqing University, Chongqing, China. His research interests include video
coding/transmission and machine learning. His focus is on network-centric
transmission and video-centric encoding problems. His research strives to
close the gap between compression and delivery through joint optimization methods that incorporate knowledge of content characteristics and link
capabilities.

Weijia Jia (Fellow, IEEE) is currently the Chair
Professor and the Director of BNU-UIC Institute of
Artificial Intelligence and Future Networks, Zhuhai,
China, and the VP for Research of BNU-HKBU
United International College, Zhuhai. He has more
than 500 publications in prestigious international
journals/conferences, research books, and book
chapters. His research interests include smart cities,
the IoT, knowledge graph constructions, multicast
and anycast QoS routing protocols, wireless sensor
networks, and distributed systems.

