IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

5605416

Multiscale Sparse Cross-Attention Network for
Remote Sensing Scene Classification
Jingjing Ma, Member, IEEE, Wei Jiang, Xu Tang , Senior Member, IEEE,
Xiangrong Zhang , Senior Member, IEEE, Fang Liu , Member, IEEE,
and Licheng Jiao , Fellow, IEEE

Abstract— Remote sensing (RS) scene classification (RSSC) is
a prominent research topic in the RS community. Multilevel
feature fusion is an important way of addressing RSSC, and
many methods have been proposed in recent years. Although they
succeed, current methods can still be improved, particularly in
distinguishing the contributions of different multilevel features
and fully and effectively fusing them. To address the above
issues and fully exploit the potential of multilevel features for
RSSC tasks, we propose a new model named multiscale sparse
cross-attention network (MSCN). It not only focuses on the effectiveness of feature learning but also emphasizes the rationality of
feature fusion. In detail, MSCN first extracts multilevel features
using a pretrained ResNet50. Also, these features are divided
into high- and low-level features according to the clues they are
involved. Then, a multiscale sparse cross-attention (MSC) module
is developed to cross-fuse the high-level feature with various
low-level features, thereby effectively mining helpful information
from multilevel features. In the fusion process, MSC not only
explores the multiscale messages in RS scenes but also mitigates
the negative impact of irrelevant information by employing
sparse operations. Third, a group convolutional block attention
module (CBAM) enhancer (GCE) is presented to enhance the
representation of classification features. GCE detects local salient
information within classification features using grouped CBAM
and further enhances crucial details by readjusting the CBAM
attention weights. This way, the classification features’ discrimination can be improved. We conducted extensive experiments
on three public RSSC datasets. The exceptional experimental
results indicate that our proposed MSCN achieves superior classification accuracy, surpassing many existing methods. Our source
codes are available at https://github.com/TangXu-Group/RemoteSensing-Images-Classification/tree/main/MSCN.
Index Terms— Feature enhancement, remote sensing scene
classification (RSSC), sparse cross-attention.

Received 8 July 2024; revised 29 October 2024 and 12 December 2024;
accepted 31 December 2024. Date of publication 3 January 2025; date of
current version 16 January 2025. This work was supported in part by the
National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62171332, Grant
62276197, and Grant 62471236; in part by the Key Research and Development
Program of Shaanxi under Grant 2024GX-YBXM-125; in part by the Natural
Science Basic Research Program of Shaanxi under Grant 2024JC-YBMS-472;
and in part by Shaanxi Province Innovation Capability Support Plan under
Grant 2023-CX-TD-09. (Corresponding author: Xu Tang.)
Jingjing Ma, Wei Jiang, Xu Tang, Xiangrong Zhang, and Licheng Jiao are
with the Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Image Understanding
of Ministry of Education, School of Artificial Intelligence, Xidian University,
Xi’an 710071, China (e-mail: tangxu128@gmail.com).
Fang Liu is with the Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Systems
for High-Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology,
Nanjing 210000, China.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TGRS.2025.3525582

I. I NTRODUCTION

R

EMOTE sensing (RS) scene classification (RSSC) refers
to assigning the specific semantics to RS images according to their scene-level contents. It is an important research
topic in the RS image processing community, and it plays
a crucial role in various applications, including land use
investigation, environmental protection, and so on [1], [2], [3].
In the early stages, handcrafted features, such as geometry
textural [4] and color histogram [5], are popular in RSSC
due to their simple implementation. Along with the machinelearning-based classifiers, acceptable results can be achieved.
However, with the improvement in spatial resolution, the
contents of RS scenes are more and more complex. The
combination of handcrafted features and traditional classifiers
is becoming increasingly inadequate. To obtain reliable classification predictions, the deep learning models, especially
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [6], [7], [8], enter the
RSSC field [9], [10], [11], [12]. Benefiting from their powerful
feature learning capability and end-to-end learning manner, the
classification accuracy of RSSC has been elevated to a new
height.
Numerous successful CNN-based methods have been proposed [13], [14], [15], [16]. They apply a series of convolution
and downsampling operations to RS scenes to extract
high-level features for classification. Although the CNN-based
methods perform well, some issues are also introduced. For
example, small-sized targets tend to disappear as the number
of convolutional layers increases, which leads to information
loss and interferes with the final decision. To further illustrate
this problem, we adopt ResNet50 [17] to extract an RS
scene’s features and visualize them orderly in Fig. 1. Here,
the RS scene is randomly selected from the UC Merced land
use [18] dataset, and it contains planes with various sizes.
The chosen RS scene and visual feature maps (from low to
high level) are exhibited in the figure below. We can easily
find that the five small planes in the middle and bottom parts
gradually disappear as the convolutional layers increase. When
the high-level feature map is used, the generated classification
result may be incorrect. To address the above trouble, the
direct and effective solution is to leverage multilevel feature information simultaneously. In other words, exploring
the multiscale knowledge hidden in RS scenes is important
for classification, which is also our crucial motivation. One
common approach is to employ dense connections [19] to

1558-0644 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: WuHan University. Downloaded on June 12,2025 at 10:54:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5605416

Fig. 1. RS scene and its visual feature maps extracted by ResNet50. The
RS scene is selected from the UC Merced land use dataset, and it contains
planes with various sizes. (a) RS scene. (b)–(e) Visual feature maps output
by the first, second, third, and fourth residual blocks.

preserve information from each stage of the CNN. However,
densely connected networks require substantial computational
and memory resources, limiting the models’ generalization
ability in practical tasks [20]. Another way involves hierarchical feature fusion [21], which focuses on effectively merging
the extracted hierarchical features. Common fusion techniques
include the feature addition [22], multiplication [23], and channel splicing [24]. Although these methods perform well, they
do not consider the redundant information and the intricate
relationships among these multilevel features [25]. Recently,
transformer-based models like vision transformer (ViT) [26]
and generative pretrained transformer (GPT) [27] models have
emerged and achieved significant success in RSSC [28], [29].
The key of transformer is the self-attention mechanism (SAM),
which focuses on exploring the global relationships within
the input data [30]. When the input data covers different
sources, SAM would be transformed into the cross-attention
mechanism (CAM) [30] smoothly, and many works use it
to fuse multilevel features to generate discriminative feature
representations [31], [32], [33]. With the help of these features,
satisfactory classification results can be produced.
The above-mentioned RSSC works have achieved impressive results; however, there is still room for improvement.
First, the multilevel features extracted by CNNs contain
diverse clues. High-level features are rich in semantics, while
low-level features contain much detailed knowledge, such as
texture and edges [34]. From the perspective of the nature
of the clues they contain, these two features complement
each other. However, many methods use them directly without
considering their contributions, which leads to an incomplete
understanding of the contents across different scales in RS
images. Second, fusing the low- and high-level features with
the specific attention mechanism [30] is a common and valuable solution to enhance the visual representation for RSSC
tasks. Nevertheless, since the contents within RS images are
complex, the details within low-level features would be huge
in volume and diverse in type. Among these details, not all
of the knowledge is beneficial for RSSC tasks. Therefore,
it is important to identify useful information and discard
interference items during the feature fusion to improve the
results of RSSC. Finally, after the feature fusion, there is
always a feature enhancement step for the final classification
features. Current methods [35], [36] usually adopt the feature
analysis tool to achieve this from the global aspect, such as
convolutional block attention module (CBAM) [37]. However,
they may disrupt the representation of information among
different local channels, limiting the classification features’
discrimination.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

This article develops an RSSC model named multiscale
sparse cross-attention network (MSCN) to address the above
problems. First, MSCN utilizes a pretrained ResNet50 network [17] to extract multilevel features from RS images. The
outputs of the first three blocks within ResNet50 are treated as
shallow features, and the output of the last block is regarded
as a high-level feature. Considering that the contributions of
various shallow features are different, instead of fusing them
into the high-level feature together, we combine them with the
high-level feature individually. This way, the valuable clues
hidden in the multilevel features can be highlighted for the
classification. Second, rather than adopting SAM or CAM
directly, a multiscale sparse cross-attention (MSC) mechanism
is proposed for multilevel feature fusion. On the one hand,
MSC can explore complex content with various scales hidden in RS scenes. On the other hand, it typically ignores
irrelevant information by the sparse scheme, reducing the
impact of interference items. Third, a group CBAM enhancer
(GCE) is introduced to enhance the feature representations.
GCE divides the fused feature into several parts along the
channel dimension and applies CBAM to each part to find
the salient messages locally. Then, all local clues are concatenated to generate the classification feature. This local-to-global
enhancement scheme ensures the discrimination of obtained
representation.
The main contributions of this article are as follows.
1) We propose an RSSC network named MSCN. It considers the varying contributions of multilevel features
extracted by CNN and cross-integrates the high-level
feature with each shallow feature. This approach effectively mines the useful information embedded within the
multilevel features.
2) MSC is introduced to fuse multilevel features effectively.
On the one hand, it focuses on exploring complex
content at various scales hidden in RS scenes. On the
other hand, it typically reduces the impact of irrelevant
information through a sparse scheme, thereby minimizing the influence of interfering items.
3) GCE is developed to enhance the representation of the
classification feature. It identifies local salient information within the classification feature by employing
a group of CBAM. Additionally, GCE enhances key
information by readjusting CBAM attention weights,
making the classification feature more discriminative.
4) Comprehensive experiments are conducted on three
datasets, and the positive results indicate the effectiveness of MSCN in RSSC tasks.
The rest of this article is summarized as follows. The
published RSSC works on multilevel feature fusion and sparse
representation in SAM are reviewed in Section II. Section III
describes the proposed MSCN. We present the experimental
results and analysis in Section IV. At last, a short conclusion
is drawn in Section V.
II. R ELATED W ORK
A. Background of RSSC
RSSC involves interpreting the content of a given RS
image and assigning a corresponding semantic label to the

Authorized licensed use limited to: WuHan University. Downloaded on June 12,2025 at 10:54:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MA et al.: MULTISCALE SPARSE CROSS-ATTENTION NETWORK FOR REMOTE SENSING SCENE CLASSIFICATION

Fig. 2. RS scene selected from Northwestern Polytechnical University-RS
image scene classification 45 (NWPU) dataset. Its semantic label is Airplane.
There are four planes in this picture, and their scales are varied. Meanwhile,
besides the airplanes, many other land covers exist, such as trees, building, and
runway, which are considered “irrelevant” in single-label classification tasks.
Thus, capturing multiscale clues and depressing the “irrelevant” contents are
important to RSSC.

identified scene [38]. The key challenge in this task lies in
feature extraction, which typically includes texture, spectral,
and semantic features [39]. Unlike natural scene classification,
RS scenes often encompass many land covers, and they are
diverse in type and scale, thereby complicating the classification process [40]. Although the models [13], [14], [15], [16]
developed based on CNN, ViT [41], and Mamba [42], [43],
[44] achieve remarkable results in RSSC tasks, further improving classification accuracy requires a deeper consideration of
the unique characteristics of RS images.
First, the scale clues hidden in RS scenes are abundant.
Taking Fig. 2 as an example, which is chosen from the
Northwestern Polytechnical University-RS image scene classification 45 (NWPU) dataset [38], its semantic label is
Airplane. There are four airplanes, and their sizes are varied
dramatically. Ensuring that information from larger planes
can be captured entirely and smaller planes would not be
lost during feature learning is a key challenge when using
deep networks for RSSC tasks. Second, the single labels
cannot cover the generous contents within RS scenes. For
instance, although the semantic label of the RS scene in
Fig. 2 is Airplane, many other land covers exist, such as
trees, building, and runway. These “irrelevant” contents would
disturb the deep networks, leading to misclassification. Based
on the discussion above, a useful RSSC model should be
capable of capturing multiscale messages from the RS image,
effectively integrating them, and suppressing the influence of
“irrelevant” information. These are precisely the key issues
that the proposed MSCN aims to address.
B. Multilevel Feature Fusion for RSSC
Multilevel feature fusion is a helpful technique for RSSC,
in which the features from different scales are integrated
subtly to describe the complex contents hidden in RS images.
With the assistance of these intact representations, good RSSC
results can be achieved. In this section, we divide the popular
methods into two groups for review, i.e., feature-combinationand CAM-based models.
Feature-combination-based fusion methods combine different features according to some specific rules, such as
concatenation, addition, and multiplication. For example,
Bi et al. [19] proposed a multiple instance densely connected

5605416

convolution network (MIDC-Net) for RSSC. MIDC-Net first
develops a densely connected CNN to learn low- and mid-level
features from RS images. The proposed network simplifies the
structure of the dense net [45] to reduce the computational
load and effectively preserve the shallow and middle features.
Then, various features are fused by the simple concatenation
for classification. The reported results confirm the usefulness
of the densely connected CNN and the feasibility of multilevel
feature fusion. However, the fusion scheme is too simple,
so the final performance cannot meet what we expected.
To solve this problem, another feature-combination-based
model was introduced in [41] named spatial–frequency multiscale transformer (SF-MSFormer). It extracts spatial features
through the feature pyramid network (FPN) [46] and spatial
transformer. In addition, it utilizes the multilevel adaptive
wavelet transform and frequency multiscale transformer to
capture global frequency texture features. To facilitate effective
fusion, SF-MSFormer employs adaptive convolutional operations to adjust their sizes before concatenating them along
the channel dimension. A similar work was published in [23],
in which a feature correlation enhancement module is first
developed to discover the relations between features from
different levels. Then, a channel splicing strategy is proposed
to combine these features. In addition, considering the spatial
differences in the fused features, a spatial refinement module is introduced to reduce differences between shallow and
deep features further. The encouraging results demonstrate the
work’s effectiveness. To deeply investigate the relationships
among the multilevel features for fusion, Chen et al. [32]
proposed a hierarchical feature fusion of transformer with
patch dilating (HFFT-PD). By whittling down the semantic
gaps between different features and ensuring the important
channels in various features, the multilevel features can be
integrated completely, enhancing the final classification performance. Chen et al. [42] proposed an RSSC model based on
Mamba, named RSMamba. It utilizes three scanning strategies
to model the global relationships in RS scenes. Subsequently,
the features obtained from different path scanning strategies
are fused by simple additions for the final classification.
RSMamba overcomes the limitation of the Mamba in spatial
position perception, and its experimental results demonstrate
its effectiveness.
Compared to these methods, MSCN accounts for the varying contributions of the local features at different levels.
MSCN adopts a progressive feature fusion strategy rather
than combining multilevel features directly, incrementally
extracting complementary information from features at different levels, which effectively focuses on targets that are
prone to being lost in deeper layers, thereby enriching
the feature representation. Furthermore, compared to simple
feature-combination-based fusion strategies, MSCN utilizes
the attention mechanism to fuse features, enabling it to model
long-range dependencies between different features. It dynamically selects key information for fusion, generating more
discriminative and representative fused features.
CAM-based fusion methods integrate the features under the
paradigm of SAM. The different features are first mapped into
the Keys, Queries, and Values. Then, they are fused according

Authorized licensed use limited to: WuHan University. Downloaded on June 12,2025 at 10:54:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5605416

to the SAM’s rule. Compared to the feature-combinationbased methods, the models in this group can globally explore
the relations within different features, enhancing the capacity of fused representations. Chen et al. [47] introduced a
two-branch network called CrossViT to investigate the effectiveness of multiscale features within ViT networks. Each
branch of CrossViT processes image patches of varying sizes.
Leveraging the CAM, CrossViT selectively fuses information
from one branch only with the classification token from
another branch, thereby reducing computational requirements
while ensuring sufficient information interaction. The favorable results obtained with CrossViT serve as evidence of
its effectiveness. Another CAM-based model was introduced
in [48] named efficient multiscale transformer and cross-level
attention learning (EMTCAL). On the one hand, EMTCAL
adopts ResNet [17] to extract multilevel features from the
local aspect. On the other hand, EMTCAL designs an efficient
ViT to mine contextual information hidden in these features.
Finally, the features across various levels are fused by a
CAM. The positive results illustrate that EMTCAL is helpful
in RSSC tasks. Similarly, Yuan and Wang [49] proposed an
RSSC network that integrates CNN and ViT, which is called
a hierarchical contextual feature-preserved network (HCFPN).
First, HCFPN extracts multilevel features from RS scenes
using CNN. Then, it captures contextual features from the first
two multilevel features using ViT. Finally, HCFPN leverages
CAM to combine different clues with high-level semantic
features for classification. The promising results confirm it is
helpful for RSSC.
Unlike these methods, MSCN improves upon the CAM to
suit RS scenes better. Specifically, MSCN extracts multiscale
information through pooling operations at different scales,
enabling the capture of the abundant scale clues hidden in
RS scenes. Additionally, MSCN employs a sparse fusion
strategy to select more critical information from local features,
effectively reducing the negative impact of “irrelevant” clues
detrimental to single-label classification tasks.
C. Sparse Representation in SAM
SAM typically requires computing attention weights for all
sequences to analyze the input data. This is a time-consuming
process, and it would be influenced by the interference information from less correlated sequences, thereby limiting its
applicability. To mitigate these challenges, researchers try
introducing the idea of sparse representation [50] into the
attention mechanism. For example, Liu et al. [51] proposed
the shifted window (SWin) Transformer, which restricts the
attention mechanism to local windows and shifts the window
at different stages to ensure understanding of global contextual
relationships. Compared to full attention, the SWin Transformer significantly improves computational efficiency while
ensuring a comprehensive understanding of image information.
Inspired by the SWin Transformer, a sparse attention network called cross-shaped window (CSWin) Transformer was
proposed in [52], which performs local attention calculations
on the input features within horizontal and vertical stripes.
It enables the model to focus on important features in the intersection area while reducing the computational complexity of

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

full attention, maintaining a balance between global and local
information. The excellent results indicate that the CSWin
Transformer performs better with reduced computational load.
Likewise, Zhu et al. [53] introduced a sparse network called
bi-level transformer (BiFormer), which innovatively employs
dual-path attention. Specifically, BiFormer initially conducts
attention calculation at a coarser granularity to filter out
irrelevant key-value pairs for each query. Then, token-totoken attention is applied to these filtered key-value pairs.
Compared to full-attention networks, BiFormer has a smaller
computational load and reduces the impact of interference
information in the image. The outstanding performance exhibit
its effectiveness. To improve the downstream tasks efficiency,
Ye et al. [54] presented a candidate elimination mechanism in
ViT. This mechanism preserves the attention scores between
templates and patches in the search region, subsequently
discarding search region patches with low scores at each stage.
As a result, the computational burden is reduced, and interference from irrelevant search region patches is minimized.
III. P ROPOSED M ETHOD
The overall framework of MSCN is depicted in Fig. 3.
It comprises four main components: a multilevel feature
extraction module (MFEM), a multilevel feature cross-fusion
module (MFCM), a GCE, and a classification module (CM).
MFEM aims to learn multilevel features from RS images.
MFCM is developed to fuse the high-level feature with different low-level features to obtain classification features. GCE
is employed to enhance the classification features further.
CM completes the final classification. Now, we introduce them
in detail.
A. Multilevel Feature Extraction Module
MFEM first leverages ResNet50, a widely used CNN
model in the RS community, to extract the multilevel features
from RS images. ResNet50 has four residual blocks, each
of which outputs a feature map corresponding to a certain
level. For convenience, we record these multilevel outputs
F1 ∈ R H1 ×W1 ×C1 , F2 ∈ R H2 ×W2 ×C2 , F3 ∈ R H3 ×W3 ×C3 , and
F4 ∈ R H4 ×W4 ×C4 , where Hi , Wi , and Ci stand for the height,
width, and channel of Fi . From F1 to F4 , features undergo
a gradual transformation from low to high level, with their
content shifting gradually from texture details to advanced
semantic information.
Then, MFEM employs convolution operations on
{F1 , F2 , F3 } to adjust their channels to C2 and reduce
the size of them to their half. Reducing their size aims to
reduce the computational costs in the subsequent fusion stage,
and utilizing 3 × 3 convolution for size reduction helps to
retain more useful feature information. This progress can be
formulated as follows:
Fi′ = Conv3×3 (Fi ), i = 1, 2, 3

(1)

where Conv3×3 (·) indicates the 3 × 3 convolution with a stride
of 2 and padding of 1. For F4 , we only adjust its channels to
C2 by a 1 × 1 convolution, which is defined as follows:
F′4 = Conv1×1 (F4 )

Authorized licensed use limited to: WuHan University. Downloaded on June 12,2025 at 10:54:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(2)

MA et al.: MULTISCALE SPARSE CROSS-ATTENTION NETWORK FOR REMOTE SENSING SCENE CLASSIFICATION

Fig. 3.

5605416

Framework of MSCN. It consists of four parts: an MFEM, an MFCM, a GCE, and a CM.

Fig. 4. Schematic of MSC. It first employs varying window sizes for average
pooling to capture multiscale clues in the input data. Then, two TopK sparse
operations are adopted to fuse the different features considering the irrelevant
information.

where Conv1×1 (·) indicates the 1 × 1 convolution with a
stride of 1 and padding of 0.
So far, we obtained the multilevel features F′1 ∈
(H1 /2)×(W1 /2)×C2
R
, F′2
∈
R(H2 /2)×(W2 /2)×C2 , F′3
∈
′
(H3 /2)×(W3 /2)×C2
H4 ×W4 ×C2
R
, and F4 ∈ R
from RS images.
B. Multilevel Feature Cross-Fusion Module
F′1 ,

F′2 ,

In MFEM, we obtain the multilevel features
F′3 , and F′4 . The high-level feature F′4 contains advanced
semantic information, while the low-level features {F′1 , F′2 , F′3 }
enclose much detailed knowledge. They complement each
other. Therefore, we hope to extract information from various
low-level features to enrich the representation of high-level
feature, making it more comprehensive and discriminative for
the final classification. However, how to fuse these features
effectively is a key problem. The contents of RS images
are diverse in type and varied in scale, and the land covers
with different scales provide varying levels of semantic and
structural details. Therefore, considering these multiscale clues
during the fusion process is the first challenge. Additionally,
not all information hidden in the multilevel features is useful. The interference messages can affect the fusion results
negatively. Hence, identifying and eliminating them in the
fusion step is another challenge. To address these challenges,
we propose MSC in this section.
The schematic of MSC is shown in Fig. 4. The key idea of
MSC comes from CAM [30], which combines the different
inputs by using the attention mechanism. Unlike CAM, the
proposed MSC not only considers multiscale clues in RS

scenes but also effectively suppresses irrelevant information
interference through sparse operations, resulting in more accurate feature fusion outcomes. Suppose there are two inputs
X ∈ Rh 1 ×w1 ×c and Y ∈ Rh 2 ×w2 ×c , where h 1 and h 2 , w1 and w2 ,
and c represent the heights, widths, and channels. To obtain
multiscale clues hidden in the input data, MSC first applies
three average pooling operations with different windows to
Y to generate Y1 , Y2 , and Y3 . Note that their shapes are
consistent with Y. The larger pooling window can capture the
overall structural information in RS images, while the smaller
one can capture detailed information. Then, these pooled
features are added together to produce Yˆ , which contains
abundant multiscale information. The details of the average
pooling operations can be found in Section IV-C1. Next, X
and Yˆ are flattened and mapped into Q ∈ R N1 ×d , K ∈ R N2 ×d ,
and V ∈ R N2 ×d (N1 equals h 1 × w1 , N2 equals h 2 × w2 , and
d equals c) according to the following formula:
Q = Flatten(X) · W1


K, V = Split LN Flatten Ŷ · W2

(3)

where Flatten(·) is the flatten operation, Split(·) is the uniformly split operation along the channel dimension, LN(·) is
layer-norm function, and W1 and W2 are linear projection
parameters. Also, the attention map M ∈ R N1 ×N2 can be
obtained by
KT
M=Q× √
c

(4)

where c is the dimension of Q.
Here, M illustrates the similarity relationships between
patches in Q and K, and determines how to allocate attention
weights to V. Specifically, the item m ij in M stands for the
correlation between the ith element in Q and the jth one in K.
The smaller the value, the lower the correlation, indicating
the jth element is irrelevant. The ith row of M signifies the
similarity between all elements in K and the ith item in Q.
To reduce the negative impacts of irrelevant elements, we use
a TopK sparse operation [55] to abandon the lowest elements
with a proportion of 1−k and reserve the highest k proportion
in each row of M. This progress is shown in Fig. 5. Note
that we replace the irrelevant elements’ values by −∞ rather
than removing them. This way, these values are transformed
into 0 through the softmax operation. The operation discussed

Authorized licensed use limited to: WuHan University. Downloaded on June 12,2025 at 10:54:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5605416

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

Fig. 5. Illustration of TopK sparse operation. Black color represents the
value of −∞, while gray indicates the value of 0.
Fig. 6. Flowchart of the proposed GCE, which applies CBAM in a grouped
manner to identify local salient information. Additionally, it readjusts the
CBAM weights to highlight critical information further.

above can be formulated as follows:
M′ = Softmax(Topk(M))

(5)

′

where M is an adjusted attention map, Softmax(·) is the
softmax activation function, and Topk(·) is the TopK sparse
operation. Compared to M, M′ sheds light on more related
elements and neglects those irrelevant. Thus, the neglected
elements are not considered, while the weights of the relevant
ones can be enlarged. Based on the TopK sparse operation,
we perform two separate TopK operations with different values
of k (represented as k1 and k2 ) on each M. Subsequently, two
learnable parameters are introduced to automatically adjust
the ratio of these two TopK operations, enabling the model
to capture diverse feature information during the fusion stage
and enhancing the model’s perceptual capability. To ensure
that MSC can automatically select them, (5) can be rewritten
as follows:


M′ = α · Softmax Topk1 (M) + β · Softmax Topk2 (M)
(6)
where α and β are learnable parameters, and Topk1 (·) and
Topk2 (·) are the functions of the TopK sparse operations with
k1 and k2 . Finally, the adjusted attention map M′ is assigned
to V by
A = M′ × V

(7)

N1 ×d

where A ∈ R
is the output of MSC, which integrated
information from the two inputs.
Based on MSC, MFCM fuses {F′1 , F′2 , F′3 } with F′4 one by
one, and then obtains the classification feature F ∈ R H4 ×W4 ×4C2
through a simple concatenation. This step can be formulated
as follows:

Ai = MSC F′4 , Fi′ , i = 1, 2, 3

F = Concat A1 , A2 , A3 , F′4
(8)
where MSC(·) means the function of MSC, and Concat(·)
indicates the concatenation. Here, the reason for gradual fusion
is that F′4 can extract information from various low-level
features, making it more comprehensive and discriminative.
C. Group CBAM Enhancer
Although F can be used to complete the classification
directly, it still includes redundant clues that limit its discrimination. Thus, we propose GCE to enhance F from the local

and global aspects simultaneously. It is primarily based on
CBAM, but it enhances the extraction of local salient features
by introducing a grouping strategy. Furthermore, it reallocates
weights based on this, improving the focus on critical regions.
The architecture of GCE is illustrated in Fig. 6. For the input F,
we first uniformly split it into g groups {F1 , F2 , . . . , Fg } along
the channel dimension. Then, independent CBAMs are applied
to them respectively to get the local attention weights
Wi = CBAM(Fi ), i = 1, 2, . . . , g

(9)

where CBAM(·) implies the function of CBAM, and Wi ∈
R H4 ×W4 ×(4C2 /g) is the CBAM weights for the ith part Fi . The
values in Wi range from 0 to 1, and a higher value means the
corresponding information is more important. When we get
Wi , Fi can be reweighted by multiplying it. Here, to highlight
the key clues in RS images, we readjust the CBAM weights.
Specifically, we first calculate the mean of each weight Wi .
Then, the elements that are higher than the mean value are set
to be 1. For the elements that are lower than the mean value,
their values remain. After this process, the upgraded weights
{W′1 , . . . , W′g } can be obtained. Subsequently, we multiply
them with {F1 , F2 , . . . , Fg }, followed by a residual connection.
This step can be defined as follows:
Fi′ = Fi · Wi′ + Fi , i = 1, 2, . . . , g.

(10)

Finally, we concatenate them along the channel dimension to
produce the enhanced feature Fˆ ∈ R H4 ×W4 ×4C2 .
D. Classification Module
ˆ a global average pooling operation is
When we get F,
applied to reduce its dimension. Then, a fully connected layer
is employed to produce the classification outputs Ffinal ∈ RC ,
where C represents the number of classification categories.
Next, we select the cross-entropy loss function [56] to optimize
our network. It can be defined as follows:
N
C

1 XX
L=−
yi,c log pi,c
(11)
N i=1 c=1
where N represents the number of samples, C denotes
the number of classification categories, yi,c represents the
ground-truth category of the ith sample as c, while pi,c
represents the probability that the ith sample is predicted as
the cth category.

Authorized licensed use limited to: WuHan University. Downloaded on June 12,2025 at 10:54:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MA et al.: MULTISCALE SPARSE CROSS-ATTENTION NETWORK FOR REMOTE SENSING SCENE CLASSIFICATION

5605416

Fig. 7. Examples of the UCM dataset. The corresponding categories are also
provided for convenience.

Fig. 9. Examples of the NWPU dataset. The corresponding categories are
also provided for convenience.

Fig. 8. Examples of the AID dataset. The corresponding categories are also
provided for convenience.

IV. E XPERIMENT

was introduced by Northwestern Polytechnical University.
There are 31 500 RS scenes in NWPU, which are divided into
45 classes equally. The RS scenes have 256 × 256 pixels,
and their pixel resolutions range from 30 to 0.2 m. Examples
of the NWPU dataset are illustrated in Fig. 9. NWPU presents
a greater challenge for accurate classification due to its large
volume and complex classes compared to the UCM and AID
datasets. For model performance estimation, we randomly
choose 10% and 20% scenes to establish the training sets,
and the rest of the scenes are used to count the results.

A. Dataset Introduction
This article selects three public datasets to study the usefulness of MSCN.
1) UCM Land Use Dataset: The UC Merced (UCM)
dataset [18] was constructed and released by the UC Merced
computer vision laboratory. It encompasses 21 categories,
such as “agricultural,” “dense residential,” and “storage tanks.”
There are 100 RS scenes in each category. Their spatial sizes
and pixel resolutions are 256 × 256 and 1 foot. Examples of
the UCM dataset are depicted in Fig. 7. To comprehensively
evaluate our model’s performance, we randomly select 50%
and 80% RS scenes from UCM to establish the training sets,
and the remaining RS scenes are regarded as the testing sets.
2) Aerial Image Dataset: The Aerial Image Dataset (AID)
[57] was constructed jointly by Wuhan University and
Huazhong University of Science and Technology in 2017.
It comprises 30 classes, each of which contains approximately
220 to 420 RS scenes, resulting in a total of 10 000 scenes.
Their spatial sizes are 600 × 600, and their spatial resolutions
range from 0.5 to 8 m. Examples and the corresponding class
names from the AID dataset are illustrated in Fig. 8. To assess
the proposed model completely, we create two training sets,
which randomly contain 20% and 50% scenes. The remaining
scenes are deemed as the testing data.
3) Northwestern Polytechnical University-RS Image Scene
Classification 45 (NWPU) Dataset: The NWPU dataset [38]

B. Experimental Settings
All experiments are conducted on a workstation equipped
with a GeForce RTX 3090 GPU, using the PyTorch platform
with a version of 1.13.1. ResNet50 of MSCN is initialized
using the pretrained parameters from ImageNet [58], and the
other parts are initialized randomly. We select AdamW [59]
as the optimizer to train the proposed MSCN. The epochs
and batch size are set to be 200 and 128, respectively. The
first five epochs are warm-up processes, and their learning
rate equals 1e − 6. For other epochs, the initial learning rate
is 1e − 4, and a cosine decay strategy is applied to adjust
the learning rate automatically. The minimum learning rate is
set as 1e − 6. To ensure the stability of the training stage,
we adopt the same data augmentation methods as described
in [47], including rand augmentation [60] and mixup [61]. All
RS scenes are resized to 224 × 224 before feeding them into
our model. For MSC, we adopt the multihead strategy [30] to
better capture the relationship between different input features,
and the number of heads is set to eight. Overall accuracy
(OA) [56] is used as the evaluation metric, which represents
the proportion of correctly classified scenes among the total
images in the dataset. We repeat each experiment five times
and report the mean and standard deviation (STD) values.
Additionally, we plot confusion matrices [56] to visualize
category-specific performance.

Authorized licensed use limited to: WuHan University. Downloaded on June 12,2025 at 10:54:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5605416

Fig. 10. OA values of different MSCNs with various pooling window sizes
counted on the UCM, AID, and NWPU datasets.

C. Parameters Analysis
Several free parameters in our MSCN should be set in
advance, they are the pooling window sizes in MSC, the
threshold k1 and k2 in the TopK operation, and the group
number g in GCE. In this section, we aim to empirically find
their optical values for the three datasets.
1) Analysis of Pooling Window Sizes in MSC: As mentioned in Section III-B, MSC applies three average pooling
operations with different window sizes to the input data to
explore the multiscale clues. To find a proper set of pooling
window sizes for different datasets, we vary the window sizes
from 1 to 11 and make four combinations, i.e., [1, 3, 5],
[3, 5, 7], [5, 7, 9], and [7, 9, 11]. Additionally, to perform a
more comprehensive analysis of the impact of pooling windows, we select larger window intervals, i.e., [1, 5, 9] and
[3, 7, 11]. Then, different MSCNs are trained with them by
using different RS scenes, and their classification results are
summarized in Fig. 10.
By observing the bars, we find that MSCN achieves the best
performance for different datasets when the pooling window
sizes are [3, 5, 7]. This is because the window size of 3 corresponds to a smaller receptive field, aiding in capturing local
details. On the other hand, the window size of 7 corresponds
to a larger receptive field, facilitating the capture of a broader
range of overall information. While the window size of 5,
being in the middle, helps to balance the capture of local and
overall information. Combining these three values enables a
more comprehensive exploration of multiscale information in
RS images. Relatively, the smaller or larger pooling windows
would result in information loss and a decline in classification
performance. Moreover, as the window intervals increase (such
as [1, 5, 9] and [3, 7, 11]), the performance of MSCN does
not improve. This is because larger intervals result in greater
differences between the pooled feature maps, leading to less
effective feature fusion. Based on the above analysis, we select
[3, 5, 7] as the optimal pooling window sizes.
2) Analysis of Threshold k1 and k2 in the TopK Operation:
We apply the TopK sparse operation in MSC to fuse useful
information from shallow to deep features. There are two
parameters to control the fusion results, i.e., k1 and k2 . We tune
their values simultaneously to determine their optimal values.
Considering that the functions of k1 and k2 are to remove
the interference information and retain enough valuable clues,

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

we set the ranges of k1 and k2 as [(1/2), (1/4), (1/8), (1/16)]
and [(1/3), (1/6), (1/9)]. The classification results of different
MSCNs with various k1 and k2 across the three datasets are
shown in Fig. 11.
We can observe that classification accuracies decrease for
the UCM and AID datasets as the value of k1 decreases. When
k2 is greater than (1/6), the experimental results increase as the
value of k2 decreases. Conversely, when the value of k2 continuously decreases, the accuracies would decline. For the NWPU
dataset, when the values of k1 and k2 are greater than (1/8) and
(1/6), respectively, the experimental results increase as their
values decrease. However, classification accuracies decrease
as their values continuously decrease. This is because lower
values of k1 and k2 make MSCN exclude more interference
information so that the results can be improved. Nevertheless,
once their values are lower than those of [(1/2), (1/6)] for
UCM and AID datasets and [(1/8), (1/6)] for NWPU dataset,
too many messages, including some important details, will
be eliminated. Thus, the classification results will get worse
and worse. Finally, as suggested by Fig. 11, the optimal
k1 and k2 values for the UCM, AID, and NWPU datasets are
[(1/2), (1/6)], [(1/2), (1/6)], and [(1/8), (1/6)], respectively.
To visually demonstrate the effectiveness of MSC in reducing the influence of interference areas during the feature fusion
stage, we visualize the information discarded and retained by
F′4 and F′3 at different k values, as shown in Fig. 12. The
red dot area in the figure represents the query information,
the semitransparent masked regions indicate the discarded
information, and the remaining information is retained for
feature fusion. The results indicate that a larger k1 value retains
more information, whereas a smaller k2 value discards more
irrelevant information while preserving more relevant data.
Additionally, the retained information varies depending on the
query. For example, when the sample is “Bridge,” the query
is related to the bridge, and more information related to the
bridge is retained. In contrast, more information relevant to
the water body can be preserved when the query is about the
water body.
3) Analysis of g in GCE: In GCE, we split the input feature
into g parts along the channel dimension, and then the local
CBAM operation is applied to different parts to get the diverse
attention weights. This way, the critical information hidden in
the input data can be highlighted accordingly. To examine the
impact of g on our model, we change its value at a range
of [1, 2, 4, 8, 16]. The classification results of MSCNs trained
by different datasets under varied g are displayed in Fig. 13.
Note that when g equals 1, GCE is a global CBAM enhancer.
From the observation of the bars, it is easy to find that the
performance of MSCNs rises when g varies from 1 to 8.
This indicates that the group partition strategy is useful in
exploring the essential clues. However, the behavior of MSCNs
weakens when g increases to 16. The main reason is that
when g becomes too large, the originally correlated channel
information is disrupted, leading to poor classification results.
Another interesting observation is that when using the AID
dataset and the ratio of training to testing samples is 5:5, the
impact of different values of g on the model is negligible. This
is because the AID dataset has a large enough sample size.

Authorized licensed use limited to: WuHan University. Downloaded on June 12,2025 at 10:54:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MA et al.: MULTISCALE SPARSE CROSS-ATTENTION NETWORK FOR REMOTE SENSING SCENE CLASSIFICATION

5605416

Fig. 11. OA values of MSCN with different k1 and k2 in MSC counted on the UCM, AID, and NWPU datasets. We fit the experimental results into a 3-D
graph, where the data points corresponding to different values of k1 and k2 are indicated by blue dots. The maximum value is highlighted with a red dot, and
its coordinates are annotated.

Fig. 12. Visualization results of TopK in MSC. The red dot area in the figure represents the query information, the semitransparent masked regions indicate
the discarded information, and the remaining information is retained for feature fusion.

With equal ratios of training and testing samples, the model
can learn features effectively during training and evaluate its
generalization ability adequately during testing. Thus, feature
enhancement has a minimal impact on the model. Overall,
we suggest the optimal value of g is eight.
D. Comparisons of State-of-the-Art Models
To evaluate our proposed MSCN, we compare it with
fifteen existing methods, and their detailed information
can be found in Table I. Here, CrossViT-15-D [47] and
Swin-T [51] are general-purpose models, while others are
proposed in the RS community. MF2CNet, EMTCAL,
EFCOMFF-Net, and MGML [62] are multilevel feature
fusion-based models. TCNN [63], AGOS(ResNet-50) [64],
MSGNet [65], SAGN [66], HFAM [67], and Upetu [68] are

Fig. 13. OA values of different MSCNs with various g values counted on
the UCM, AID, and NWPU datasets.

deep feature-based models. SKAL [69] and CGINet [70] are
global and local feature fusion-based models. The backbones

Authorized licensed use limited to: WuHan University. Downloaded on June 12,2025 at 10:54:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5605416

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

TABLE I
D ETAILED I NFORMATION OF THE C OMPARED M ETHODS

TABLE II
OA VALUES AND STD S (%) OF VARIOUS A PPROACHES C OUNTED ON
UCM DATASET. T HE B EST VALUES A RE H IGHLIGHTED IN B OLD

of MF2CNet [71] and UPetu [68] are octave convolution [72] and ConvNexXt [73], respectively, while others use
ResNet [17]. All compared models are accomplished using
the released codes by the authors. Their free parameters
are set according to the original literature, and their experimental settings are consistent with the contents described in
Section IV-B.
1) Results on UCM: The results of all the models counted
on the UCM dataset are shown in Table II. All methods achieve
commendable classification results. Two general-purpose models (especially Swin-T) perform well, which illustrates the
effectiveness of the Transformer. Even without considering the
characteristics of RS images, the Transformer still helps them
achieve good classification results. However, the proposed
MSCN outperforms them in all cases, demonstrating our
model’s superiorities. Among the multilevel feature fusion
methods, EFCOMFF-Net and MGML demonstrate the most
vital behavior, primarily since they reduce discrepancies
between multilevel features during the fusion stage. Even so,
our MSCN outperforms them, achieving OA improvements of
0.15% and 0.09% over EFCOMFF-Net and 0.19% and 0.14%

over MGML at 50% and 80% training ratios, respectively. For
the deep feature-based methods, AGOS (ResNet-50) performs
the best, with results only 0.02% and 0.24% lower than our
approach. The strongest global and local feature fusion-based
model is CGINet. This is because its specific integration
scheme leads to the obtained features that can comprehensively
represent RS scenes. Even so, our MSCN’s OA values are
still 0.12% and 0.11% higher than CGINet’s. Overall, MSCN
outperforms other methods in all cases. These encouraging
findings can be attributed to the following three points.
First, MSCN fuses multilevel features step by step, which
is beneficial for integrating the different clues thoroughly so
that a comprehensive feature representation can be generated.
Second, the MSC-based fusion strategy not only extracts
multiscale information from RS scenes but also reduces the
negative impacts of interfering knowledge. Finally, GCE further emphasizes the key messages within the classification
features, leading to better predictions.
Furthermore, we present the confusion matrices achieved
by MSCN in Fig. 14. Note that these two confusion matrices
are counted by the best results among the five repeated experiments. Analysis of Fig. 14(a) reveals that MSCN correctly
classifies almost all categories, with only several samples
from “golf course” and “medium residential” scenes being
incorrectly classified. When the training ratio is 80%, all
classes are correctly classified, demonstrating the powerful
classification ability of MSCN.
2) Results on AID Dataset: The results of different methods
counted on the AID dataset are shown in Table III. Similarly, the OA values of our MSCN are the highest among
all compared models in all cases. When the training ratio
equals 20%, MSCN’s OA value is 95.86%, while Swin-T,
MF2CNet, MSGNet, EFCOMFF-Net, and MGML’s OA values
are 95.45%, 95.54%, 95.46%, 95.76%, and 95.47, respectively.
Compared to other models, our advantages are clear, surpassing CrossViT-15-D by 0.55%, TCNN by 1.31%, EMTCAL
by 1.17%, SKAL by 1.48%, AGOS (ResNet-50) by 0.87%,
SAGN by 0.69%, HFAM by 1.15%, CGINet by 0.52%, and
UPetu by 0.53%. When the training ratio comes to 50%, our
model surpasses the second-best Swin-T and EFCOMFF-Net
by over 0.22%. The performance of MSGNet is also good,
which is only 0.28% less than ours. However, the performance gaps between MSCN and other models are distinct,
surpassing CrossViT-15-D by 0.50%, MF2CNet by 0.44%,
TCNN by 0.74%, EMTCAL by 1.05%, SKAL by 0.70%,
AGOS (ResNet-50) by 0.45%, SAGN by 0.69%, EMSCNet
by 0.50%, MGML by 0.41%, HFAM by 0.73%, CGINet
by 0.36%, and UPetu by 0.42%. The AID dataset contains
more scenes and a wider variety of categories than the UCM
dataset, making it more challenging to classify accurately. The
leading performance of MSCN discussed above demonstrates
its strong stability and generalization capability.
The confusion matrices of MSCN for AID are depicted in
Fig. 15. Whether the proportion of training samples is 20% or
50%, most samples from different categories can be classified
accurately by our model. For instance, all scenes corresponding to “river” are correctly classified. However, we also find
that MSCN performs weakly in the “pond” category, with most

Authorized licensed use limited to: WuHan University. Downloaded on June 12,2025 at 10:54:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MA et al.: MULTISCALE SPARSE CROSS-ATTENTION NETWORK FOR REMOTE SENSING SCENE CLASSIFICATION

5605416

Fig. 14. Confusion matrices of MSCN counted on UCM dataset. The scene categories corresponding to the numbers are consistent with Fig. 7. (a) Confusion
matrix for 50% training. (b) Confusion matrix for 80% training.

TABLE III
OA VALUES AND STD S (%) OF VARIOUS A PPROACHES C OUNTED ON AID
DATASET. T HE B EST VALUES A RE H IGHLIGHTED IN B OLD

TABLE IV
OA VALUES AND STD S (%) OF VARIOUS A PPROACHES C OUNTED ON
NWPU DATASET. T HE B EST VALUES A RE H IGHLIGHTED IN B OLD

images misclassified as “forest.” This is because the water
bodies in “pond” scenes often reflect the “forest” features, such
as grass banks or shrub forests. Consequently, the network
tends to misclassify them as “forest.” This is an area where
MSCN requires further improvement.
3) Results on NWPU Dataset: Compared to UCM and
AID, the RS scenes in NWPU are large in volume and
diverse in the category, enhancing the difficulties for accurate
classification. The classification results of our MSCN and
other compared models counted on NWPU are summarized
in Table IV. The performance of MSCN maintains a leading
position across various training ratios, demonstrating its powerful classification capabilities. When using 10% samples to
train models, MSCN surpasses the second-best EFCOMFFNet by 0.20%. Compared to other methods, the improvements
achieved by MSCN are 0.69% (over CrossViT-15-D), 0.57%

(over Swin-T), 0.57% (over MF2CNet), 2.39% (over TCNN),
1.01% (over EMTCAL), 2.60% (over SKAL), 0.29% (over
AGOS (ResNet-50)), 0.24% (over MSGNet), 0.91% (over
SAGN), 0.48% (over EMSCNet), 0.38% (over MGML),
1.83% (over HFAM), 0.36% (over CGINet), and 0.44% (over
UPetu). When using 20% samples to train models, MSCN still
performs best. It surpasses CrossViT-15-D by 0.56%, Swin-T
by 0.45%, MF2CNet by 0.74%, TCNN by 1.54%, EMTCAL
by 0.94%, SKAL by 1.80%, AGOS (ResNet-50) by 0.31%,
SAGN by 1.10%, EMSCNet by 0.51%, MGML by 0.32%,
HFAM by 3.78%, CGINet by 0.21%, and UPetu by 0.89%.
The confusion matrices of MSCN for NWPU are presented
in Fig. 16. When the training ratio is 10% [see Fig. 16(a)],
MSCN performs well in most categories. However, its behavior is weak in “tennis court” and “medium residential.” Their
samples are misclassified into each other’s category. When the

Authorized licensed use limited to: WuHan University. Downloaded on June 12,2025 at 10:54:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5605416

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

Fig. 15. Confusion matrices of MSCN counted on AID dataset. The scene categories corresponding to the numbers are consistent with Fig. 8. (a) Confusion
matrix for 20% training. (b) Confusion matrix for 50% training.

Fig. 16. Confusion matrices of MSCN counted on NWPU dataset. The scene categories corresponding to the numbers are consistent with Fig. 9. (a) Confusion
matrix for 10% training. (b) Confusion matrix for 20% training.

Fig. 17. OA values of Net-0 to Net-3 on the UCM, AID, and NWPU datasets.

training ratio rises to 20% [see Fig. 16(b)], the performance of
different methods has improved. Although MSCN is still the
best, it does not perform nicely for “tennis court” and “medium
residential.” The reasons behind this can be summarized as

Fig. 18. OA values of Net-3 to Net-7 on the UCM, AID, and NWPU datasets.

follows. Most “tennis court” scenes are surrounded by residential areas, resulting in high similarity between the two
categories. In this scenario, our model is likely to produce
incorrect classifications. Improving the model’s ability to differentiate highly similar samples is one of our future tasks.

Authorized licensed use limited to: WuHan University. Downloaded on June 12,2025 at 10:54:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MA et al.: MULTISCALE SPARSE CROSS-ATTENTION NETWORK FOR REMOTE SENSING SCENE CLASSIFICATION

Fig. 19.

5605416

Visualization results of Net-0 to Net-7. We select the classification features of each network and plot heat maps to obtain the visualization results.

E. Ablation Study
MFCM and GCE are two key parts of the proposed
MSCN. MFCM is mainly composed of three MSCs, which
are designed to extract valuable clues from multilevel features.
GCE is an enhancer that effectively highlights key information
within the classification feature. In this section, we plan
to study their contributions. To this end, we construct four
networks and analyze their performance on the three datasets.
These four networks are as follows:
1) Net-0: MFEM + CM;
2) Net-1: MFEM + MFCM + CM;
3) Net-2: MFEM + GCE + CM;
4) Net-3: MFEM + MFCM + GCE + CM.
Net-0 is a baseline network where only MFEM is adopted as
the feature extractor. To complete the classification, multilevel
features learned by MFEM are concatenated and directly
fed into CM. Net-1 is built upon Net-0 with the addition of MFCM. Instead of concatenating multilevel features,
MFCM can fuse them effectively. Then, CM is also used
to generate the predictions. Net-2 expands on Net-0 by
incorporating GCE. In this model, the multilevel features are
enhanced by GCE respectively. Then, the enhanced features
are concatenated together. With the assistance of CE, the
classification results can be obtained. Net-3 is actually the
proposed MSCN. In Net-0 and Net-2, the 3 × 3 convolution
in MFEM transforms features at each level to match the size
of F′4 in Section III-A, ensuring consistent dimensions for
concatenation.
The performance of Net-0 to Net-3 across the three datasets
is depicted in Fig. 17. By observing those bars, the behavior
of Net-1 and Net-2 is stronger than that of Net-0 in all cases,
indicating that the feature fusion scheme in MFCM and the
feature enhancement GCE play a positive role in our model.
An interesting finding is that the OA values of Net-1 are higher
than that of Net-2 in most cases. This suggests that MFCM has
a more significant impact than GCE in our proposed MSCN.
In other words, the multilevel feature fusion contributes more
to the classification results. Also, when MFCM and GCE are
combined, Net-3 outperforms Net-1 and Net-2. This denotes

that these two modules can provide complementary clues for
the final classification.
Additionally, to further demonstrate the effectiveness of our
model, we designed the following ablation experiments, they
are the following:
1) Net-4: MFEM + MFCM(CAM) + GCE + CM;
2) Net-5: MFEM + MFCM(only k1 in MSC) + GCE +
CM;
3) Net-6: MFEM + MFCM(only k2 in MSC) + GCE +
CM;
4) Net-7: MFEM + MFCM + CBAM + CM.
For Net-4, we replace all MSCs in MFCM with CAMs to
evaluate the performance of MSC compared to CAM. For
Net-5 and Net-6, we apply the TopK operation only with
k1 and k2 individually for all MSCs to verify the necessity of
selecting two different k values. For Net-7, instead of GCE,
CBAM is adopted to assess the performance improvement
brought by GCE over CBAM. The performance of Net-4 to
Net-7 across the three datasets is depicted in Fig. 18. The
behavior of Net-3 (i.e., MSCN) is also exhibited for reference.
From observing these bars, we can easily find that Net-3
outperforms other networks, which implies the importance of
MSC, multiple k values, and GCE. Taking UCM with 50%
training samples as an example, when we use CAM rather
than MSC, Net-4’s OA value is 0.21% lower than Net-3.
This is because, compared to CAM, which only focuses on
information fusion, MSC also pays attention to exploring the
multiscale clues and removing the redundant messages. Thus,
the fused results achieved by MSC can provide more helpful
materials for subsequent operations. Taking AID with 20%
training samples as another instance, once the multiple k-value
scheme is exchanged with the single k-value design, the
performance of Net-5 and Net-6 drops apparently compared
with Net-3. This confirms the rationale behind our choice of
k1 and k2 values. For Net-7, its behavior is weaker than that
of Net-3 in all cases. This is mainly due to GCE’s ability to
extract key information in groups compared to CBAM, thereby
improving the classification results.
Finally, we provided visualizations for each ablation experiment, as shown in Fig. 19. These heat maps reflect the focus

Authorized licensed use limited to: WuHan University. Downloaded on June 12,2025 at 10:54:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5605416

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

areas of different models. Net-3 is the proposed MSCN. Taking
the sample of “Airplane” as an example, the attention area
of Net-3 precisely focuses on the airplanes’ location in the
image. In contrast, Net-0 has a more dispersed attention area,
lacking specificity compared to Net-3. Net-1 shows insufficient
focus on the airplane region due to the absence of GCE.
Net-2 increases attention to irrelevant areas because it lacks
MFCM. Net-4 employs CAM for feature fusion, but without
filtering interference information, its overall performance is
inferior to that of Net-3. Net-5 and Net-6 both utilize a single
k value, which limits the breadth of their overall areas of focus.
Additionally, because Net-6 employs a smaller k value, its area
of focus is further narrowed compared to Net-5. While Net-7
effectively concentrates on target areas, it still experiences
issues with excessive focus on some areas that are not targets.
V. C ONCLUSION
This article presents a new RSSC network named MSCN.
First, MSCN leverages a pretrained ResNet50 to extract multilevel features. The features are categorized into high-level
and low-level groups based on their contributions. Then,
the high-level features are cross-fused with different shallow
features by the developed MFEM to extract useful information
effectively. The proposed MFEM mainly consists of the MSC
mechanism. By employing sparse operations, MSC can fuse
multilevel features while filtering out irrelevant information,
thus reducing the impact of interference messages. Finally,
we introduce GCE to enhance the representation of classification features by identifying local salient information with the
help of CBAM. Encouraging experimental results counted on
multiple public RSSC datasets demonstrate that our MSCN is a
helpful classification model. However, the network is prone to
misclassification when the feature similarity between different
scene categories is high or the scenes are closely related.
Overcoming this deficiency is a key focus of our future work.
R EFERENCES
[1] Z. Wu, P. Ma, Y. Zheng, F. Gu, L. Liu, and H. Lin, “Automatic
detection and classification of land subsidence in deltaic metropolitan
areas using distributed scatterer InSAR and oriented R-CNN,” Remote
Sens. Environ., vol. 290, May 2023, Art. no. 113545.
[2] V. Barriere, M. Claverie, M. Schneider, G. Lemoine, and
R. D’Andrimont, “Boosting crop classification by hierarchically
fusing satellite, rotational, and contextual data,” Remote Sens. Environ.,
vol. 305, May 2024, Art. no. 114110.
[3] H. He, J. Yan, D. Liang, Z. Sun, J. Li, and L. Wang, “Timeseries land cover change detection using deep learning-based temporal
semantic segmentation,” Remote Sens. Environ., vol. 305, May 2024,
Art. no. 114101.
[4] R. M. Anwer, F. S. Khan, J. van de Weijer, M. Molinier, and
J. Laaksonen, “Binary patterns encoded convolutional neural networks
for texture recognition and remote sensing scene classification,” ISPRS
J. Photogramm. Remote Sens., vol. 138, pp. 74–85, Apr. 2018.
[5] N. Dalal and B. Triggs, “Histograms of oriented gradients for human
detection,” in Proc. IEEE Comput. Soc. Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2005, pp. 886–893.
[6] Z. Li, F. Liu, W. Yang, S. Peng, and J. Zhou, “A survey of convolutional
neural networks: Analysis, applications, and prospects,” IEEE Trans.
Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 12, pp. 6999–7019, Dec. 2021.
[7] L. Zhang and L. Zhang, “Artificial intelligence for remote sensing
data analysis: A review of challenges and opportunities,” IEEE Geosci.
Remote Sens. Mag., vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 270–294, Jun. 2022.

[8] W. Ma et al., “Feature split–merge–enahancement network for remote
sensing object detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60,
2022, Art. no. 5616217.
[9] X. Zhang, W. Ma, C. Li, J. Wu, X. Tang, and L. Jiao, “Fully convolutional network-based ensemble method for road extraction from
aerial images,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 17, no. 10,
pp. 1777–1781, Oct. 2020.
[10] Z. Wang, Y. Ma, and Y. Zhang, “Review of pixel-level remote sensing
image fusion based on deep learning,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 90, pp. 36–58,
Feb. 2023.
[11] D. Hong, J. Yao, C. Li, D. Meng, N. Yokoya, and J. Chanussot,
“Decoupled-and-coupled networks: Self-supervised hyperspectral image
super-resolution with subpixel fusion,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5527812.
[12] C. Liu, J. Ma, X. Tang, F. Liu, X. Zhang, and L. Jiao, “Deep hash
learning for remote sensing image retrieval,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 59, no. 4, pp. 3420–3443, Apr. 2021.
[13] I. Dimitrovski, I. Kitanovski, D. Kocev, and N. Simidjievski, “Current
trends in deep learning for Earth observation: An open-source benchmark arena for image classification,” ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote
Sens., vol. 197, pp. 18–35, Mar. 2023.
[14] A. Thapa, T. Horanont, B. Neupane, and J. Aryal, “Deep learning for
remote sensing image scene classification: A review and meta-analysis,”
Remote Sens., vol. 15, no. 19, p. 4804, Oct. 2023.
[15] Y. Yang et al., “Semi-supervised multiscale dynamic graph convolution
network for hyperspectral image classification,” IEEE Trans. Neural
Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 6806–6820, May 2022.
[16] X. Tang et al., “Hyperspectral image classification based on 3-D
octave convolution with spatial–spectral attention network,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 59, no. 3, pp. 2430–2447, Mar. 2021.
[17] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for
image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 770–778.
[18] Y. Yang and S. Newsam, “Bag-of-visual-words and spatial extensions
for land-use classification,” in Proc. 18th SIGSPATIAL Int. Conf. Adv.
Geograph. Inf. Syst., Nov. 2010, pp. 270–279.
[19] Q. Bi, K. Qin, Z. Li, H. Zhang, K. Xu, and G.-S. Xia, “A multipleinstance densely-connected ConvNet for aerial scene classification,”
IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 29, pp. 4911–4926, 2020.
[20] G. Li, M. Zhang, J. Li, F. Lv, and G. Tong, “Efficient densely connected
convolutional neural networks,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 109, Jan. 2021,
Art. no. 107610.
[21] X. Lu, H. Sun, and X. Zheng, “A feature aggregation convolutional
neural network for remote sensing scene classification,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 57, no. 10, pp. 7894–7906, Oct. 2019.
[22] G. Zhang et al., “A multiscale attention network for remote sensing
scene images classification,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ.
Remote Sens., vol. 14, pp. 9530–9545, 2021.
[23] J. Chen, J. Yi, A. Chen, and Z. Jin, “EFCOMFF-Net: A multiscale
feature fusion architecture with enhanced feature correlation for remote
sensing image scene classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5604917.
[24] N. He, L. Fang, S. Li, J. Plaza, and A. Plaza, “Skip-connected covariance
network for remote sensing scene classification,” IEEE Trans. Neural
Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 31, no. 5, pp. 1461–1474, May 2020.
[25] S. Karim, G. Tong, J. Li, A. Qadir, U. Farooq, and Y. Yu, “Current
advances and future perspectives of image fusion: A comprehensive
review,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 90, pp. 185–217, Feb. 2023.
[26] A. Dosovitskiy et al., “An image is worth 16×16 words: Transformers
for image recognition at scale,” 2020, arXiv:2010.11929.
[27] D. Hong et al., “SpectralGPT: Spectral remote sensing foundation
model,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 46, no. 8,
pp. 5227–5244, Aug. 2024.
[28] A. A. Aleissaee et al., “Transformers in remote sensing: A survey,”
Remote Sens., vol. 15, no. 7, p. 1860, Mar. 2023.
[29] C. Li et al., “CasFormer: Cascaded transformers for fusion-aware
computational hyperspectral imaging,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 108, Aug. 2024,
Art. no. 102408.
[30] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
Syst., vol. 30, pp. 5998–6008, Jun. 2017.
[31] P. Lv, W. Wu, Y. Zhong, F. Du, and L. Zhang, “SCViT: A spatialchannel feature preserving vision transformer for remote sensing image
scene classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
Art. no. 4409512.

Authorized licensed use limited to: WuHan University. Downloaded on June 12,2025 at 10:54:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MA et al.: MULTISCALE SPARSE CROSS-ATTENTION NETWORK FOR REMOTE SENSING SCENE CLASSIFICATION

[32] X. Chen et al., “Hierarchical feature fusion of transformer with patch
dilating for remote sensing scene classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 4410516.
[33] J. Ma, J. Duan, X. Tang, X. Zhang, and L. Jiao, “EATDer: Edge-assisted
adaptive transformer detector for remote sensing change detection,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5602015.
[34] Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, and G. Hinton, “Deep learning,” Nature, vol. 521,
no. 7553, pp. 436–444, 2015.
[35] Q. Bi, K. Qin, H. Zhang, and G.-S. Xia, “Local semantic enhanced
convnet for aerial scene recognition,” IEEE Trans. Image Process.,
vol. 30, pp. 6498–6511, 2021.
[36] X. Tang, Q. Ma, X. Zhang, F. Liu, J. Ma, and L. Jiao, “Attention
consistent network for remote sensing scene classification,” IEEE J. Sel.
Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 14, pp. 2030–2045, 2021.
[37] S. Woo, J. Park, J.-Y. Lee, and I. S. Kweon, “CBAM: Convolutional
block attention module,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., Sep. 2018,
pp. 3–19.
[38] G. Cheng, J. Han, and X. Lu, “Remote sensing image scene classification: Benchmark and state of the art,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 105, no. 10,
pp. 1865–1883, Oct. 2017.
[39] S. Li, W. Song, L. Fang, Y. Chen, P. Ghamisi, and J. A. Benediktsson,
“Deep learning for hyperspectral image classification: An overview,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 57, no. 9, pp. 6690–6709,
Sep. 2019.
[40] G. Cheng, X. Xie, J. Han, L. Guo, and G.-S. Xia, “Remote sensing
image scene classification meets deep learning: Challenges, methods,
benchmarks, and opportunities,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ.
Remote Sens., vol. 13, pp. 3735–3756, 2020.
[41] Y. Yang et al., “An explainable spatial–frequency multiscale transformer
for remote sensing scene classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5907515.
[42] K. Chen, B. Chen, C. Liu, W. Li, Z. Zou, and Z. Shi, “RSMamba:
Remote sensing image classification with state space model,” IEEE
Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 21, pp. 1–5, 2024.
[43] H. Zhang, K. Chen, C. Liu, H. Chen, Z. Zou, and Z. Shi,
“CDMamba: Remote sensing image change detection with mamba,”
2024, arXiv:2406.04207.
[44] Z. Liu et al., “MambaDS: Near-surface meteorological field downscaling
with topography constrained selective state space modeling,” IEEE
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 4112615.
[45] G. Huang, Z. Liu, L. Van Der Maaten, and K. Q. Weinberger, “Densely
connected convolutional networks,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit., Jul. 2017, pp. 4700–4708.
[46] T. Y. Lin, P. Dollàr, R. Girshick, K. He, B. Hariharan, and S. Belongie,
“Feature pyramid networks for object detection,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jul. 2017, pp. 2117–2125.
[47] C.-F. R. Chen, Q. Fan, and R. Panda, “CrossViT: Cross-attention multiscale vision transformer for image classification,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Jun. 2021, pp. 357–366.
[48] X. Tang, M. Li, J. Ma, X. Zhang, F. Liu, and L. Jiao, “EMTCAL:
Efficient multiscale transformer and cross-level attention learning for
remote sensing scene classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5626915.
[49] J. Yuan and S. Wang, “HCFPN: Hierarchical contextual featurepreserved network for remote sensing scene classification,” Remote
Sens., vol. 15, no. 3, p. 810, Jan. 2023.
[50] M. Farina et al., “Sparsity in transformers: A systematic literature
review,” Neurocomputing, vol. 582, May 2024, Art. no. 127468.
[51] Z. Liu et al., “Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using
shifted windows,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV),
Oct. 2021, pp. 10012–10022.
[52] X. Dong et al., “CSWin transformer: A general vision transformer backbone with cross-shaped windows,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 12124–12134.
[53] L. Zhu, X. Wang, Z. Ke, W. Zhang, and R. W. Lau, “BiFormer: Vision
transformer with bi-level routing attention,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023, pp. 10323–10333.
[54] B. Ye, H. Chang, B. Ma, S. Shan, and X. Chen, “Joint feature learning
and relation modeling for tracking: A one-stream framework,” in Proc.
17th Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV). Tel Aviv-Yafo, Israel: Springer,
Oct. 2022, pp. 341–357.
[55] X. Chen, H. Li, M. Li, and J. Pan, “Learning a sparse transformer
network for effective image deraining,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023, pp. 5896–5905.

5605416

[56] X. Tang, R. Du, J. Ma, and X. Zhang, “Noisy remote sensing scene
classification via progressive learning based on multiscale information
exploration,” Remote Sens., vol. 15, no. 24, p. 5706, Dec. 2023.
[57] G.-S. Xia et al., “AID: A benchmark data set for performance evaluation
of aerial scene classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 55, no. 7, pp. 3965–3981, Jul. 2017.
[58] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “ImageNet classification
with deep convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., vol. 25, May 2012, pp. 84–90.
[59] I. Loshchilov and F. Hutter, “Decoupled weight decay regularization,”
2017, arXiv:1711.05101.
[60] E. D. Cubuk, B. Zoph, J. Shlens, and Q. V. Le, “Randaugment: Practical
automated data augmentation with a reduced search space,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. Workshops (CVPRW),
Jun. 2020, pp. 702–703.
[61] H. Zhang, M. Cisse, Y. N. Dauphin, and D. Lopez-Paz, “Mixup: Beyond
empirical risk minimization,” 2017, arXiv:1710.09412.
[62] Q. Zhao, S. Lyu, Y. Li, Y. Ma, and L. Chen, “MGML: Multigranularity multilevel feature ensemble network for remote sensing scene
classification,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 34, no. 5,
pp. 2308–2322, May 2023.
[63] W. Wang, Y. Chen, and P. Ghamisi, “Transferring CNN with adaptive
learning for remote sensing scene classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5533918.
[64] Q. Bi, B. Zhou, K. Qin, Q. Ye, and G.-S. Xia, “All grains, one
scheme (AGOS): Learning multigrain instance representation for aerial
scene classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
Art. no. 5629217.
[65] J. Wang, W. Li, M. Zhang, R. Tao, and J. Chanussot, “Remote-sensing
scene classification via multistage self-guided separation network,” IEEE
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5615312.
[66] Y. Yang, X. Tang, Y.-M. Cheung, X. Zhang, and L. Jiao, “SAGN:
Semantic-aware graph network for remote sensing scene classification,”
IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 32, pp. 1011–1025, 2023.
[67] Q. Wan, Z. Xiao, Y. Yu, Z. Liu, K. Wang, and D. Li, “A hyperparameterfree attention module based on feature map mathematical calculation for
remote-sensing image scene classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5600318.
[68] Z. Dong, Y. Gu, and T. Liu, “UPetu: A unified parameter-efficient finetuning framework for remote sensing foundation model,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5616613.
[69] Q. Wang, W. Huang, Z. Xiong, and X. Li, “Looking closer at the
scene: Multiscale representation learning for remote sensing image scene
classification,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 4,
pp. 1414–1428, Apr. 2022.
[70] Y. Zhao, Y. Chen, S. Xiong, X. Lu, X. X. Zhu, and L. Mou, “Coenhanced global-part integration for remote-sensing scene classification,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 4702114.
[71] L. Bai, Q. Liu, C. Li, Z. Ye, M. Hui, and X. Jia, “Remote sensing image
scene classification using multiscale feature fusion covariance network
with octave convolution,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60,
2022, Art. no. 5620214.
[72] Y. Chen et al., “Drop an octave: Reducing spatial redundancy in convolutional neural networks with octave convolution,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019, pp. 3435–3444.
[73] Z. Liu, H. Mao, C.-Y. Wu, C. Feichtenhofer, T. Darrell, and S. Xie, “A
convnet for the 2020s,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit., Feb. 2022, pp. 11976–11986.
[74] Y. Zhao, J. Liu, J. Yang, and Z. Wu, “EMSCNet: Efficient multisample
contrastive network for remote sensing image scene classification,” IEEE
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5605814.

Jingjing Ma (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. and
Ph.D. degrees from Xidian University, Xi’an, China,
in 2004 and 2012, respectively.
She is currently an Associate Professor at
the Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and
Image Understanding of Ministry of Education,
Xidian University. Her research interests include
computational intelligence and image understanding.

Authorized licensed use limited to: WuHan University. Downloaded on June 12,2025 at 10:54:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5605416

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

Wei Jiang received the B.E. degree in automation from Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, China,
in 2021. He is currently pursuing the M.E. degree
with the School of Artificial Intelligence, Xidian
University, Xi’an, China.
His research interests include machine learning
and remote sensing image processing.

Xu Tang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
B.Sc., M.Sc., and Ph.D. degrees in electronic circuit
and system from Xidian University, Xi’an, China,
in 2007, 2010, and 2017, respectively.
From 2015 to 2016, he was a Joint Ph.D. Student
along with Prof. W. J. Emery at the University
of Colorado at Boulder, Boulder, CO, USA. He is
currently a Full Professor at the Key Laboratory
of Intelligent Perception and Image Understanding of Ministry of Education, Xidian University.
His research interests include remote sensing image
content-based retrieval and reranking, hyperspectral image processing, remote
sensing scene classification, and object detection. For more details, please refer
to: https://web.xidian.edu.cn/tangxu/en/index.html.
Xiangrong Zhang (Senior Member, IEEE) received
the B.S. and M.S. degrees from the School of
Computer Science, Xidian University, Xi’an, China,
in 1999 and 2003, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree
from the School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian
University, in 2006.
From January 2015 to March 2016, she was
a Visiting Scientist with the Computer Science
and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA. She
is a Professor with the Key Laboratory of Intelligent
Perception and Image Understanding of Ministry of Education, Xidian University. Her research interests include pattern recognition, machine learning,
and remote sensing image analysis and understanding.

Fang Liu (Member, IEEE) was born in China,
in 1990. She received the B.S. degree in information and computing science from Henan University,
Kaifeng, China, in 2012, and the Ph.D. degree in
intelligent information processing from Xidian University, Xi’an, China, in 2018.
She is currently an Associate Professor at Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing,
China. Her research interests include deep learning, object detection, polarimetric SAR image
classification, and change detection.

Licheng Jiao (Fellow, IEEE) received the B.S.
degree in high voltage from Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, China, in 1982, and the M.S.
and Ph.D. degrees in electronic engineering from
Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China, in 1984 and
1990, respectively.
From 1984 to 1986, he was an Assistant Professor
with the Civil Aviation Institute of China, Tianjin,
China. From 1990 to 1991, he was a Post-Doctoral
Fellow with the Key Laboratory for Radar Signal
Processing, Xidian University, Xi’an, where he is
currently the Director of the Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and
Image Understanding of Ministry of Education of China. He has authored or
co-authored more than 200 scientific articles. His research interests include
signal and image processing, nonlinear circuits and systems theory, wavelet
theory, natural computation, and intelligent information processing.
Dr. Jiao is a member of the IEEE Xian Section Executive Committee and
an Executive Committee Member of the Chinese Association of Artificial
Intelligence. He is the Chairperson of the Awards and Recognition Committee.

Authorized licensed use limited to: WuHan University. Downloaded on June 12,2025 at 10:54:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

