IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

4703215

A Lightweight Semantic Segmentation Network
Based on Self-Attention Mechanism and
State Space Model for Efficient Urban
Scene Segmentation
Langping Li, Jizheng Yi , Member, IEEE, Hui Fan, and Hui Lin
Abstract— In the semantic segmentation of remote sensing
images, methods based on convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
and Transformers have been extensively studied. Nevertheless,
CNN struggles to capture the global context due to its local
feature extraction, while Transformer is constrained by the
complexity of quadratic calculations. Recently, there has been
a great deal of interest in Mamba-based state space models.
However, the existing Mamba-based methods do not adequately
consider the significance of local information in remote sensing
image segmentation tasks. In this article, a codec style network
UMFormer is constructed for the semantic segmentation of
remote sensing images. Specifically, UMFormer employs the
ResNet18 as the encoder, with the objective of performing a preliminary image feature extraction. Subsequently, a self-attention
mechanism is optimized to extract the global information pertaining to the objects of disparate sizes within the context
of a multiscale condition. For fusing the codec feature map
information, another attention structure is built to reconstruct
the space information and to capture the relative position
relationship. Finally, a decoder based on Mamba is designed
to effectively model both global and local information. Concurrently, a feature fusion mechanism utilizing feature similarity is
devised with the objective of embedding local information into
global ones. Numerous experiments on UAV Imagery Dataset
(UAVid), Vaihingen, and Potsdam datasets have demonstrated
that the proposed UMFormer exhibits enhanced accuracy while
maintaining an efficient running speed. The code will be freely
available at: https://github.com/takeyoutime/UMFormer
Index Terms— Remote sensing image, self-attention mechanism, semantic segmentation, state space model.

I. I NTRODUCTION
EMOTE sensing images are information on the Earth’s
surface obtained by remote sensing techniques, including aerial photography and satellite remote sensing, with

R

Received 8 November 2024; revised 31 March 2025; accepted 14 April
2025. Date of publication 18 April 2025; date of current version 1 May 2025.
This work was supported in part by the Scientific Research Program of Hunan
Provincial Department of Education under Grant 22B0258 and in part by
the Natural Science Foundation of Hunan Province under Grant 2024JJ5649.
(Corresponding authors: Jizheng Yi; Hui Fan.)
Langping Li, Jizheng Yi, and Hui Fan are with the Institute of Artificial Intelligence Application, Central South University of Forestry and
Technology, Changsha 410004, China (e-mail: take_your_time084@163.com;
kingkong148@163.com; t20142226@csuft.edu.cn).
Hui Lin is with the Key Laboratory of Forestry Remote Sensing Based
Big Data and Ecological Security for Hunan Province, Changsha 410004,
China, and also with the Key Laboratory on Forest Resources Management
and Monitoring in Southern China of National Forestry and Grassland
Administration Changsha 410004, China (e-mail: 1053460198@qq.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TGRS.2025.3562185

wide coverage and high resolution. Semantic segmentation
is a crucial technology in remote sensing image processing.
By accurately identifying and labeling ground objects and
land surface features in remote sensing images, the semantic
segmentation of remote sensing images provides basic support
for ground object recognition, change detection, and land cover
classification.
Although semantic segmentation plays a significant role in
a variety of domains, it still faces several challenges. Some
samples of the current challenges in this task are presented
in Fig. 1(a) The diversity and complexity of urban scenes in
remote sensing images present a significant challenge for the
accurate segmentation of these images. In (b), large categories,
such as roads, vegetation, and buildings, are typically spread
throughout the image and occupy a significant proportion of
pixels. Small categories, like vehicles and pedestrians, have a
relatively low number of pixels, but their spatial distribution
is uneven. Consequently, the edges of various object types in
the segmentation results are susceptible to confusion. In (c),
global dependencies exist between the same categories, such
as the interconnection of roads, and some districts have large
areas of buildings or vegetation. There are local dependencies
between different categories, such as the relationship between
vehicles and roads. Improving the capture of these global
and local dependencies may enhance the accuracy of object
segmentation.
Most existing works extract image information through
convolutional operation with fixed receptive field [1], [2], [3],
[4]. Nevertheless, the convolutional operation with a fixed
receptive field is limited in its ability to capture the global
information for large categories of targets, resulting in loss or
ambiguity of target information. Moreover, small categories of
target information may be sparsely extracted, leading to inaccurate location. The issue of modeling contextual information
in images is addressed by the use of the Transformer [5],
[6], [7], [8]. Unfortunately, the efficiency of the Transformer’s
self-attention mechanism in semantic segmentation of remote
sensing images is reduced due to the linear-time inference
and slow secondary training. To address the aforementioned
issues, the researcher has proposed the Mamba state space
model as a solution [9]. As an efficient long-distance context
capture module, Mamba is able to capture global information
while maintaining a low consumption of computing resources.

1558-0644 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Wuhan University. Downloaded on July 01,2025 at 11:31:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4703215

Subsequently, an attempt was made to incorporate Mamba into
remote sensing image semantic segmentation tasks, with the
objective of replacing Transformer for the capture of global
information. However, existing Mamba-based methods fail to
take into account the significance of local information in the
context of this task, resulting in an inability to achieve an
optimal balance between accuracy and efficiency. Furthermore,
Mamba displays considerable potential for application in the
field of semantic segmentation of remote sensing images.
Therefore, Mamba still has great application prospects in
remote sensing image semantic segmentation tasks.
Based on this objective, we aim to design a remote sensing
image semantic segmentation network that achieves an optimal
equilibrium between accuracy and efficiency. Inspired by the
self-attention mechanism and Mamba, UMFormer is proposed to address the aforementioned challenges. Specifically,
UMFormer combines the respective advantages of convolutional neural networks (CNNs), self-attention mechanism and
Mamba to create a hybrid network effectively. The ResNet18
[10] is chosen as the encoder part of UMFormer due to the
powerful feature extraction capability of the residual block.
The principal contributions of this study are summarized as
follows.
1) In order to address the deficiency in the acquisition
of global information regarding objects in traditional
networks, a multiscale self-attention module (MSAM)
is established in this paper. This module references
the self-attention mechanism from Transformer and
mines long-distance contextual semantic information of
objects.
2) Before the image restoration, a lightweight attention
mechanism, called information integration attention
(IIA), is proposed. The IIA is capable of determining the
relative positional relationship between objects according to the position invariance of image features, thereby
accurately locating the regions of interest and reducing
the impact of noise.
3) We integrate Vision Mamba [11] into the decoder of
UMFormer and design the global local vision state space
(GL-VSS) block. The global information branch utilizes
Vision Mamba for the extraction of global information.
The local information branch employs dilated convolution to enhance the integration and extraction of local
information. At the end of the GL-VSS block, two
branches are embedded into each other via a concise and
effective structure to achieve the global information is
predominant and local information is employed to refine
the global information.
4) In order to assess the merits of the proposed UMFormer
for the task of remote sensing image semantic segmentation, numerous experiments and visual analytics were
conducted on three public datasets. The results demonstrate that the proposed UMFormer exhibits an optimal
balance between efficiency and accuracy, outperforming
existing lightweight semantic segmentation networks.
The rest of this article is structured as follows. Section II
reviews related research on semantic segmentation. Section III
details the structure and functions of each part of the proposed UMFormer. Section IV describes the experimental

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

Fig. 1. Some samples with challenges in semantic segmentation of remote
sensing images. (a) Urban diversity and complexity in remote sensing images
challenge segmentation. (b) Size and distribution disparities between categories lead to edge confusion in segmentation. (c) Global dependencies exist
within categories and cross-category local dependencies between them.

process, experimental results, and visualization results. Finally,
Section V concludes this article and discusses prospects for
future development.
II. R ELATED W ORKS
A. CNN-Based Methods
The semantic segmentation of images represents a significant area of research within the field of computer vision.
However, conventional methods may not fully meet user
requirements. In order to overcome the aforementioned issues,
U-Net [12] proposed an encoder–decoder framework. The
U-Net architecture utilized a symmetrical network structure
and a skip connection to preserve detailed information during
image restoration, thereby improving the accuracy of image
segmentation. To enhance the feature extraction capability of
the encoder–decoder framework, Chaurasia and Culurciello
[13] incorporated residual blocks [10] on the original encoder.
Qin et al. [14] replaced the convolutional layer with a ReSidual
U-block. This approach facilitated a more direct backpropagation of the gradient to the previous layer, which in turn
enhanced the efficiency of feature transfer. Diakogiannis et
al. [15] proposed a combination of residual linkage, atrous
convolution, and pyramid scene parsing pooling to solve the
problem of the large within-class and small between-class
variance in pixel values of objects of interest.
Those above CNN-based methods have demonstrated their
effectiveness in image semantic segmentation tasks. Highresolution remote sensing images provide detailed spatial
information that reflects the distribution and layout of surface
objects, including buildings, roads, and vegetation. Therefore,
more effective algorithms for image semantic segmentation are
necessary to handle and analyze this type of data.
B. Transformer-Based Methods
In recent years, the Transformer [5] has generated significant excitement in the field of natural language processing.
Inspired by Transformer, ViT [6] applied Transformer for
the first time to the field of image processing and achieved
advanced results. Most of the existing Transformer-based
semantic segmentation methods can be broadly divided into
two categories. The first category combines CNN and Transformer. The classical ones such as: Chen et al. [7] used

Authorized licensed use limited to: Wuhan University. Downloaded on July 01,2025 at 11:31:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LI et al.: LIGHTWEIGHT SEMANTIC SEGMENTATION NETWORK BASED ON SELF-ATTENTION MECHANISM

4703215

Transformer to model the global context of the feature maps
from CNN processing. This design fully utilized the feature
extraction advantages of CNN and captured global information
through Transformer. Considering the mutual influence and
blending of global and local information, the UNetformer [16]
employed the CNN encoder to extract local information
and the Transformer decoder to extract global information.
Transformer-only architecture is the second category. To fully
utilize the capabilities of Transformer, Cao et al. [8] employed
the Swin Transformer module [17] as the fundamental unit
for interactive learning of feature representation and distant
semantic information. In order to simplify the decoder, Xie et
al. [18] combined a Transformer with a lightweight multilayer
perceptron (MLP), integrating local and global information to
produce robust representations.
While Transformer have been successful in image semantic
segmentation tasks, they also have several limitations. The
self-attention’s fully connected nature leads to increased computational complexity, requiring more hardware resources than
CNN. In addition, the Transformer model has restrictions on
input sequence length, resulting in inadequate processing of
position information.

layer, and Mamba-based decoding layer. In Sections III-A–
III-D, the function of each part is explained in detail.

C. Mamba-Based Methods

Remote sensing images contain numerous objects of varying
sizes. Most existing solutions add transformers to the middle
layer of the network [7], [25]. These methods have a specific
effect. However, they only extract global information at a fixed
scale. Consequently, the multiscale global information of the
object cannot be obtained. To achieve accurate segmentation,
it is crucial to use long-distance contextual semantic information to extract dependencies between objects from a multiscale
perspective. Based on the above considerations, we propose a module called MSAM that utilizes a self-attention
mechanism to capture long-distance contextual semantic information and identify dependencies between objects under
multiscale conditions. As demonstrated in Fig. 2(b), the
MSAM can significantly enhance the segmentation accuracy by implementing mutual self-attention across different
scales.
The data processing flow of MSAM is shown in
Algorithm 1. To begin with, the output of the four stages of
ResNet18 is utilized as the input of MSAM. A 3 × 3 convolution is employed for feature extraction, with the channel set to
128. Subsequently, the feature maps are downsampled to the
size of the feature maps in the final stage, thereby yielding
a preliminary representation of global information at varying
scales. To explore the potential positional relationships and
long-distance dependencies of objects across different scales,
the self-attention mechanism is applied to feature maps at two
different scales. In addition, to achieve a more lightweight selfattention mechanism, the number of channels in the feature
map is reduced to 128. Prior to this step, linear transformations
are utilized to create weight parameter matrices W Q , W K ,
and WV for the relevant pairwise feature maps. Subsequently,
query, key, and value features are generated for each weight,
which can be expressed as follows:

In an effort to solve the problem of low computational efficiency caused by the high quadratic computational complexity
of Transformer, the Mamba [9] was proposed based on the
state space models [19]. Due to the great potential of Mamba
in modeling long sequences, Zhu et al. [11] attempted to add
it to image tasks and proposed a new generic vision backbone
with bidirectional Mamba blocks (Vim). Wang et al. [20],
Liu et al. [21], and Ruan et al. [22] designed image semantic
segmentation models with pure Mamba structure, paving the
way for the development of more effective Mamba-based
methods in the future. Subsequently, some researchers have
attempted to integrate Mamba into the field of remote sensing
image semantic segmentation with the objective of achieving
global perception. RS-Mamba [23] proposed an omnidirectional selective scanning module, which permits the selective
scanning of remote sensing images in multiple directions,
thereby enabling the extraction of large-scale spatial features
in multiple directions. RS3Mamba [24] used Mamba as an
auxiliary encoder to provide additional global information to
the main convolutional encoder.
The aforementioned Mamba-based methodologies recognize
Mamba’s formidable capacity to extract global information.
The local information in remote sensing images are also a
crucial aspect that cannot be overlooked. However, existing
Mamba-based methods do not take into account the importance of local information. The manner in which global and
local information in remote sensing images can be taken into
account has become a significant factor in improving the
accuracy of this task.
III. M ETHODOLOGY
The general design of the proposed UMFormer is shown in
Fig. 2(a). The whole model can be divided into three parts:
CNN-based encoding layer, Transformer-based intermediate

A. CNN-Based Encoder for Feature Extraction
ResNet18 [10] is a classic architecture in deep learning that
is widely used in various image-related tasks. Compared with
the deeper network layer version of ResNet, this version has
decent feature extraction capabilities and lower computing and
storage costs. Therefore, the ResNet18 was selected as the
encoder for UMFormer due to its lightweight, robustness, and
availability of pretrained models. In the decoder of UMFormer,
the image is first processed using a 7 × 7 convolution. Subsequently, the four-stage double-layer Resblock is employed to
extract information from the feature map and perform image
downsampling. The feature maps generated by the first three
layers are sent to the decoding layer via skip connections for
feature integration. The feature map from the final encoder
layer is inputted into the Transformer-based middle layer for
further processing.
B. Transformer-Based Module for Integrating Information at
Multiple Scales

Q = Ji W Q

(1)

K = J j WK

(2)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Wuhan University. Downloaded on July 01,2025 at 11:31:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4703215

Fig. 2.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

Overall architecture and details of the proposed UMFormer. (a) UMFormer overall architecture. (b) MSAM. (c) IIA. (d) GL-VSS block.

V = J j WV

(3)

where Ji and J j represent the feature maps at different scales, H and W represent the height and width of
the input feature maps, respectively. The feature maps that

self-attention, generated using Q, K , and V , can be expressed
in the following formula:
Ci j = Softmax(Q K T · α)V

Authorized licensed use limited to: Wuhan University. Downloaded on July 01,2025 at 11:31:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(4)

LI et al.: LIGHTWEIGHT SEMANTIC SEGMENTATION NETWORK BASED ON SELF-ATTENTION MECHANISM

where Ci j denotes the self-attention feature map and α denotes
the scaling parameter. After Ci j are generated, the dimension
is resized to 1 × H × W . Then, all Ci j are concatenated
according to the channel dimension, and convolutions are used
to unify all position information. The above operations only
model the information in the height and width directions of
the image, and completely discard the majority of channel
information. Consequently, an auxiliary branch is designed.
This branch fuses the four feature maps, which contain different levels of information, through two residual blocks as a
means of supplementing the channel information. The output
of the auxiliary branch is then added to the output of the
self-attention mechanism, which represents the final output of
MSAM.
Algorithm 1 MSAM
Input: Resnet18 encoder output feature map
X 1 ∈ RC×H1 ×W1 , X 2 ∈ RC×H2 ×W2 ,
X 3 ∈ RC×H3 ×W3 , X 4 ∈ RC×H4 ×W4
Output: Multi-scale global informative feature map
Y ∈ RC×H4 ×W4
1 list[P1 , P2 , P3 , P4 ] ← Conv3×3 (X 1 , X 2 , X 3 , X 4 )
2 Initialize an empty list θ
3 for i in range(Len(list)) do
4
for j in range(Len(list)) do
5
if i ≤ j then
6
Ci j ← self-attention(Pi , P j )
7
θ .append(Ci j )
8
end
9
end
10 end
11 ϑ ← Cat(θ )
12 ω ← Merge(P1 , P2 , P3 , P4 )
13 γ ← Residual block(ω)
14 Y ← γ ⊕ Conv1×1 (ϑ)
15 return Y

C. Mamba-Based Decoder for Global and Local Information
Fusion
The Transformer-based network currently exhibits linear time inference and slow secondary training [17], [26].
To address this issue, the Vision Mamba [11] was introduced
into the decoding layer of the UMFormer. However, existing
methods of image segmentation based on Mamba [22], [27]
have not achieved significant performance improvements. This
is because they rely solely on Mamba’s ability to extract global
information, overlooking the importance of local information.
To address this, we propose a decoder called the GL-VSS
block, which uses local features to refine global features after
extracting both global and local information, thereby enhancing segmentation accuracy. Furthermore, the effectiveness of
attention mechanisms in image processing tasks has been
demonstrated [28]. In order to enhance the merging of the
feature maps generated by the codec and reduce issues such
as noise interference and misclassification among categories
in the segmentation results, we design an effective lightweight

4703215

attention mechanism called IIA. The overall structure of IIA
and GL-VSS block is shown in Fig. 2(c) and (d), respectively.
Sections III-C1–?? outlines the specific function of each
component in the Mamba-based decoding layer.
1) IIA: The transfer of features between the encoder and
decoder can provide the necessary detailed information for
image recovery. Therefore, we apply IIA in the process
of fusing the information from the encoder and decoder
and reconstructing the position information. Before starting,
the encoder output feature map X 1 ∈ RC×H ×W and the
decoder output feature map X 2 ∈ RC×H ×W are concatenated
into M according to the channel dimension. The dimension
of M was resized to create two new feature maps, h ∈
RW ×C×H and w ∈ R H ×C×W , which can be expressed as
follows:
h, w ← Resize(M).

(5)

Subsequently, the feature map information is compressed by
using average pooling and max-pooling operations on h along
the width direction. The output can be written as follows:
xch (h) =

1 X
h c (h, i )
H 0≤i<H

ych (h) = Max h c (h, i )
0≤i<H

(6)
(7)

where xch (h) and ych (h) represent the output at channel c and
height h after average pooling and Max pooling operations,
respectively. Performing the same process for w produces
two outputs along the height direction. These outputs can be
expressed as follows:
xw
c (w) =

1 X
wc ( j , w)
W 0≤ j<W

yw
c (w) = Max wc ( j , w)
0≤ j<W

(8)
(9)

w
where xw
c (w) and yc (w) denote the output at channel c and
width w after average pooling and max-pooling operations,
respectively. The feature maps obtained from (6) to (9) contain
sequential information within the channel. Therefore, we transform them into sequence information for processing. The
feature maps generated after processing h and w are separately
concatenated and the number of channels is adjusted to obtain
the information expression

z h = Conv2d Cat xch , ych
(10)

w
w
z w = Conv2d Cat xc , yc
(11)

where z h ∈ R1×C×H and z w ∈ R1×C×W . The dimensions
of z h and z w are reduced to express their sequence information. At this point, z h and z w have more precise location
information. Compared with 2-D convolutions, 1-D convolutions are better suited for processing sequential information
and are more lightweight. The 1-D convolutions with a
kernel size of 7 were used to process information, which
can effectively enhance the ability of positioning information
fusion. Then, a 1-D BatchNorm is used to achieve a state
of zero-mean value with a standard deviation of 1 to obtain

Authorized licensed use limited to: Wuhan University. Downloaded on July 01,2025 at 11:31:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4703215

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

the location attention representation in the height and width
dimensions
Eh = σ (Bn (Conv1d(z h )))

(12)

Ew = σ (Bn (Conv1d(z w )))

(13)

where σ denotes the Sigmoid activation function and Bn
denotes the 1-D BatchNorm operation. The output of IIA is
obtained, which can be expressed as follows:
Output = M ⊕ (M ⊗ Eh ) ⊕ (M ⊗ Ew ).

(14)

Algorithm 2 GL-VSS Block
Input: Feature map X ∈ RC×H ×W , convolution dilation
rate ri ={1, 2, 3| i ∈{0, 1, 2}}
Output: Information augmented feature maps
Y ∈ RC×2H ×2W
1 Part of local information branch:
2 Initialize an empty list δ
3 l ← Conv1×1 (X ) ⊕Conv3×3 (X )
4 for i in range (2) do
5
l ← Conv3×3 (l, ri )
6
δ.append(l)
7 end
8 Outl ← Conv1×1 (Cat(δ))
9 Part of global information branch:
X.size(channel)
10 G 1 , G 2 , G 3 , G 4 ←
4
11 Outg ← Cat(VSS blcok(G 1 , G 2 , G 3 , G 4 ))
12 Part of feature embedding head:
13 Sum ← Outl ⊕ Outg
14 The cosine similarity Sim of between Outl and Outg is
obtained by Equation (17)
15 γ ← Conv3×3 (Sum)
16 ϕ ← γ ⊗ Sigmoid(Sim)
17 Out ← γ ⊕ Conv3×3 (ϕ)
18 The output of GL-VSS block:
19 Y ← interpolate(Out)
20 return Y
2) GL-VSS Block for Feature Embedding: In the context of semantic segmentation in remote sensing imagery,
the utilization of both global and local information is of
equal importance. Global information play a crucial role in
establishing dependencies between different objects, while
also enhancing the completeness of segmentation for large
categories. The local information provides rich spatial details,
which not only improve segmentation accuracy but also enable
more precise identification of boundaries between categories,
reducing misclassification. By integrating global and local
information, the overall segmentation performance is significantly enhanced, yielding more accurate and comprehensive
results. Considering the above factors, the proposed GL-VSS
block comprises a local information branch, a global information branch, and a feature embedding head. Algorithm 2
shows the data processing flow of the GL-VSS block.

a) Local information branch: Due to the complexity
of object size variation in remote sensing imagery, how to
focus on objects of different sizes has been a key research
focus. We cascade convolutions of different receptive fields to
improve the attention of local branches to objects of different
sizes. Convolution with kernel size 1 is first used to integrate
and filter information across channels. Three depthwise separate convolutions with different receptive fields are used to
effectively abstract and represent objects of different sizes in
all directions. The outputs of the three cascaded convolutions
are then concatenated according to the channel dimension and
the number of channels is controlled to supplement the detailed
information. Ultimately, it is added to the output of the 1 ×
1 convolution as the final output of the local information
branch.
b) Global information branch: Inspired by Mamba, the
VSS block is used as the body of the global information
branch to extract global features and model long-distance
context information. Wu et al. [29] conducted an in-depth
study of the key factors affecting Mamba’s computational load.
Their research yielded a pronounced increase in computational
memory utilization with rising channel numbers. Thus, the
input of the original VSS block was split into four feature
maps of the same dimensional size according to the channel
dimension, which can be expressed as follows:
input · size(dim)
n
S = {chunki |i ∈ {1, . . . , n}}

chunki =

(15)
(16)

where input·size(dim) represents the partition dimension of the
tensor to be partitioned, n represents the number of uniformly
partitioned tensor blocks, and chunki represents the feature
map of the ith channel group. The S is entered into the VSS
block to obtain the global information expression. Concatenating all chunki in S according to the channel dimension is the
final output of the global information branch.
c) Feature embedding head: In order to achieve the
effective embedding of local information into global information, a feature embedding head has been designed. The
initial result is obtained by summing the two outputs. To obtain
more precise semantic information and spatial details, a 3 ×
3 depthwise separable convolution is employed, with the
channel adjusted to 64. To enhance the fusion process with
local information that is similar to the global information, the
cosine similarity [30] was calculated between the two feature
maps. This step can be written as follows:
Pn
Ai · Bi
Sim = qP i =1 qP
(17)
n
n
2
2
i =1 A i ·
i =1 Bi
where Ai and Bi denote the pixel values at the same position
in the two feature maps, and n denotes the number of pixels
of the feature maps. The Sim is mapped nonlinearly using
the Sigmoid function to enhance its representation ability.
Then, the Sim is used as a weight to multiply the result of
feature map addition, strengthening feature regions with high
similarity. A convolutional operation with a size of 3 × 3 is
then applied to extract additional information. The residual

Authorized licensed use limited to: Wuhan University. Downloaded on July 01,2025 at 11:31:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LI et al.: LIGHTWEIGHT SEMANTIC SEGMENTATION NETWORK BASED ON SELF-ATTENTION MECHANISM

connection is added to prevent the network gradient from
disappearing or exploding. By appropriately fusing global and
local information with appropriate weighting, the final output
can be significantly improved in terms of expressiveness and
generalization ability.

D. Loss Function
During the training phase, a combination of soft crossentropy (SCE) loss LSCE and Dice loss LDice is defined as the
loss function. LSCE is appropriate for multi-classification tasks
at the pixel level and can effectively penalize misclassification.
The objective of LDice is to maximize the overlap between
the predicted segmentation result and the true label. LSCE and
LDice are expressed as follows:
N

LSCE = −

K

1 XX n
y log ŷ nk
N n=1 k=1 k
N

LDice = 1 −

(18)

K

2 X X yˆ nk ykn
N n=1 k=1 ŷ nk + ykn

(19)

where N and K represent the number of pixels and the number
of classification categories, respectively. ykn and ŷ nk represent
the one-hot encoding of the true semantic labels and the
corresponding softmax output of the network, respectively. For
a better combination of the two losses, two scaling factors, α
and β, are set. The total loss, denoted by L, can be expressed
as follows:
L = α × LSCE + β × LDice .

(20)

IV. E XPERIMENTS
A. Datasets Processing
1) UAVid: The UAV Imagery Dataset (UAVid) is a collection of aerial images captured by autonomous aerial vehicles
in a variety of scenes and environments [31]. The dataset
contains 42 video sequences, and images are intercepted from
the sequences. These images are high-resolution 4k images
captured from a slanted viewpoint and densely annotated with
8 classes. For the experiment, we utilize 200 images as the
training set, 150 images as the testing set, and 70 images as
the validation set. All images were padded and cropped to
1024 × 1024 pixels.
2) Vaihingen: The dataset originates from Vaihingen,
a small village with many individual buildings and small
multi-story buildings. It includes 33 remote sensing images of
different sizes. Each image contains three forms: TOP image,
digital surface model (DSM) image, and normalized DSM
(NDSM) image. The spatial resolution is 9 cm. The TOP
image format used in the experiment is an 8-bit TIFF file
that consists of three bands: NIR, red, and green. The training
set consisted of images with ID: 1, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, 15, 17,
21, 23, 26, 28, 32, 34, and 37. The validation set consisted of
image ID 30, and the testing set consisted of the remaining
17 images.

4703215

3) Potsdam: The Potsdam dataset contains 39 remote sensing images, each measuring 6000 × 6000 pixels. The image
format is similar to the Vaihingen dataset, but with an additional image (red, green, blue, and NIR). In the course of
the experiment, the TOP image is utilized exclusively. The
training set includes images with the following IDs: 2_11,
2_12, 3_10, 3_11, 3_12, 4_10, 4_11, 4_12, 5_10, 5_11, 5_12,
6_7, 6_8, 6_9, 6_10, 6_11, 6_12, 7_7, 7_8, 7_9, 7_11, and
7_12. ID 2_10 is reserved for validation, and the remaining
14 images (excluding image 7_10) are used for the testing set.
B. Experimental Setup
1) Experimental Parameter Settings: The experiments were
conducted using the PyTorch framework on a workstation
with 64 GB memory, an Intel i9-11900K 3.50-GHz CPU, and
a 24-GB NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090 GPU. To facilitate the
training of all models, the AdamW optimizer was utilized to
accelerate convergence. In addition, we adjusted the learning
rate using the cosine annealing strategy. The initial learning
rate was set to 6e−4 .
When training models on the UAVid dataset, the input
images were set to 1024 × 1024 pixels. Data augmentation
strategies include random vertical flip, random horizontal flip,
and random brightness. The epoch was set to 45 and the
batch size was set to 4. When training the model on the
other datasets, we randomly cropped the input image to a size
of 512 × 512 pixels. Meanwhile, random vertical flipping,
random horizontal flipping, and random rotation were applied
as data augmentation techniques. The epoch was set to 105 and
the batch size was set to 4.
2) Evaluation Metrics: Two types of objective metrics were
used to intuitively compare the overall performances of the
proposed model and other models. The first category is used
to evaluate the accuracy of the model segmentation results,
including overall accuracy (OA), mean F1_score (mF1), and
mean IoU (mIoU). The second category evaluates the scale of
models, including the floating point operation count (FLOPs),
the frames per second (FPS), and the number of model
parameters (M).
3) Networks for Comparison:
1) Semantic Segmentation Network Based on CNN: SwiftNet [32], MANet [33], ABCNet [34], FANet [35],
EaNet [36], MAResU-Net [37], MEDSN [38], DPFEAFF [39], GANet [4], and ResUNet-a [15].
2) Semantic Segmentation Network Based on Transformer:
TransUNet [7], UNetFormer [16], Swin-UperNet [17],
SegFormer [18], Segmenter [26], BANet [40], BoTNet [41], CoaT [42], CMTFNet [43], DCSA-Net [44],
DecoupleNet [45], and ESDINet [46].
3) Semantic Segmentation Network Based on Mamba: VMUNet [22], Mamba-UNet [20], Swin-UMamba [21],
RS3Mamba [24], and UrbanSSF [47].
C. Ablation Study
In order to verify the effectiveness of the components of the
proposed UMFormer, we attempted to add a single component

Authorized licensed use limited to: Wuhan University. Downloaded on July 01,2025 at 11:31:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4703215

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

本文内容详细解读（点击查看）
TABLE I
A BLATION R ESULTS OF E ACH C OMPONENT OF THE UMF ORMER ON T HREE DATASETS

Fig. 3. Comparison of segmentation results before and after adding MASM.
(a) Original images. (b) Ground truth. (c) Baseline. (d) Baseline + MASM.

Fig. 4. Comparison of segmentation results before and after adding IIA. (a)
Original images. (b) Ground truth. (c) Baseline. (d) Baseline + IIA.

or a combination of components to the Baseline for experimental verification. The present study will utilize U-Net with
ResNet18 as the encoder as the baseline network for the experimental investigation of ablation. Three datasets including the
UAVid dataset, the Vaihingen dataset, and Potsdam dataset
were selected to verify the generalization and robustness of
each component or combination of components. To ensure
fairness, all ablation studies were trained and validated in the
same environment. The numerical results are shown in Table I.
1) Effect Analysis of MSAM: For MSAM, after being
added to the UMFormer, the original single-scale feature
map is scaled at different scales to obtain multiscale feature
representations. Subsequently, a process of mutual attention
between feature maps of different scales was employed. From
the Baseline + MSAM, it can be seen that compared with
Baseline, which lacks an operation following the encoder, the
mIoU on the three datasets are all increased by more than
0.4% after adding MSAM.
Combined with the analysis of the visualization results in
Fig. 3. As can be seen in the figure, the completeness of the
network prediction for the building class and the low vegetation class is greatly improved after the addition of MSAM.
In particular, the powerful multiscale global information capture capability of MSAM enables the network to supplement
the missing long-range context dependency information of

each class. This also demonstrates the effectiveness of our
proposed MSAM.
2) Effect Analysis of IIA: In the UMFormer, a layer IIA is
added before the input of each layer decoder. This layer is used
to reconstruct the spatial location information of the feature
map after skip connection. As demonstrated in Baseline +
IIA, the mIoU on the UAVid and Vaihingen datasets exhibits
a 0.5% improvement following the addition of IIA.
As is evident in the first and second rows of Fig. 4,
prior to the addition of IIA, the network often misclassified
one class as another and the effect of clutter was evident.
With the addition of IIA, it is clear that these problems are
mitigated, increasing the ability to distinguish between and
within classes. This proves that the proposed IIA module is
beneficial to distinguish similar objects.
3) Effect Analysis of GL-VSS Block: The GL-VSS block is
used to replace the use of convolution in the baseline, thus
enabling image recovery. Compared with the convolutional
method, the GL-VSS block is able to extract both global
and local information from the feature map more effectively,
while also facilitating the fusion of this information. From
Baseline + GL-VSS block, it can be seen that after replacing
the original decoder with GL-VSS block, the MeanF1, OA,
and mIoU on the three datasets have been enhanced by at
least 0.6%, 0.5%, and 1.1%, respectively.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Wuhan University. Downloaded on July 01,2025 at 11:31:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LI et al.: LIGHTWEIGHT SEMANTIC SEGMENTATION NETWORK BASED ON SELF-ATTENTION MECHANISM

Fig. 5. Comparison of segmentation results before and after adding GL-VSS
block. (a) Original images. (b) Ground truth. (c) Baseline. (d) Baseline +
GL-VSS block.

The resulting visualization is presented in the Fig. 5. From
the initial two rows, it is evident that the Baseline approach is
rather coarse in terms of edge detection across all classes.
In the third row, we observe the presence of incomplete
inter-class predictions and misjudgments in the categorization
of certain instances. The utilization of the GL-VSS block
as the model decoder has led to a significant reduction in
the aforementioned issues. This is due to the fact that the
GL-VSS block is capable of capturing both global information
and local features, which are essential for improving the
accuracy of remote sensing image segmentation. Furthermore,
the distinctive feature fusion head of the GL-VSS block is
able to seamlessly integrate global features and local features,
creating a distinctive point where global information are
predominant and local information is employed to refine the
global information. This increases the precision and coherence
of the edge prediction for each class. This also exemplifies the
efficacy of our proposed GL-VSS block.
4) Effect Analysis of Different Combinations of Components: Furthermore, an investigation was conducted into the
potential benefits of combining the IIA and GL-VSS blocks
into the Baseline. In the UAVid and Vaihingen datasets, the
combination of the two yielded superior performance. The
combination of IIA and GL-VSS yields an improvement of
1% in MeanF1 and mIoU. In the end, various numerical
performances were listed on three datasets of the UMFormer,
which can prove the effectiveness of the proposed UMFormer.
Among them, the UMFormer achieves the largest improvement compared with Baseline on the UAVid dataset, with
MeanF1, OA, and mIoU reaching 79.3%, 85.7%, and 67.6%,
respectively.
5) Different Decoders for UMFormer: In order to demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed GL-VSS block in
dividing the edges of different categories of object edges,
we present visualizations of the feature maps of the UMFormer
decoder on the Vaihingen and Potsdam datasets. As illustrated

4703215

Fig. 6. Visualization results of the feature maps on Vaihingen and Potsdam
validation set. The first two rows illustrate a sample from the Vaihingen
dataset, while the subsequent two rows illustrate a sample from Potsdam
dataset. (a) Original image and ground truth, while (b)–(e) results of the
feature maps, progressing from high to low levels of abstraction from left
to right. Lines (1, 3) and lines (2, 4) indicate the heatmaps before and after
the GL-VSS block, respectively.

in Fig. 6, the images of the two datasets show discernible
changes following GL-VSS block processing. In particular,
the boundaries between different classes of objects are clearly
discernible. This is due to the fact that the GL-VSS block
is capable of extracting a variety of local information while
simultaneously capturing global context information. Despite
the considerable disparity in the dimensions of different types
of objects in remote sensing images, the precision of each
object extraction is assured. In addition, the calculation of
the cosine similarity between global and local information
can serve to reinforce similar information and enhance the
interaction between global and local information.
In order to ascertain the efficacy of the proposed GL-VSS
block as a decoder, we utilize decoders based on different
methods on the proposed UMFormer and subject them to
identical training conditions. The following types of decoders
were employed in this study: a CNN-based decoder (U-Net),
a Transformer-based decoder (UNetFormer), a Mamba-based
decoder (VM-UNet), and a GL-VSS block. The numerical
performance of the four combinations on the UAVid dataset
is presented in Table II. The GL-VSS block shows a significant improvement in performance compared to the other
three decoders. This is evidenced by the improvements in
MeanF1, OA, and mIoU, which reached 1.0%, 0.6%, and
0.7%, respectively.
Furthermore, as illustrated in Table II, the incorporation
of Mamba is associated with a pronounced decline in the
FPS metric of the proposed model. This is not the desired
outcome. Mamba employs a bidirectional SSM model to
facilitate visual representation learning. Although theoretically
efficient, in practice, the additional computational burden
significantly increases the load on the CPU and GPU. From
the perspective of memory footprint, Mamba’s bidirectional
SSM model is required to perform a significant number of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Wuhan University. Downloaded on July 01,2025 at 11:31:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4703215

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

TABLE II
N UMERICAL R ESULTS OF D IFFERENT D ECODERS C OMBINATIONS OF THE UMF ORMER ON THE UAV ID T ESTING S ET

Fig. 7. Visualization of comparison results on the UAVid testing set with state-of-the-art lightweight networks. The FLOPs and FPS are measured by a
1024 × 1024 input on a single NVIDIA GTX 3090 GPU.

TABLE III
A BLATION E XPERIMENT OF L OSS F UNCTION ON
VAIHINGEN AND P OTSDAM DATASET

matrix operations and sequence modeling, particularly in the
context of high-resolution image processing. This requires a
larger memory footprint and may be a significant contributing
factor to the observed reduction in FPS.
Compared with the existing state-of-the-art lightweight
decoders, but the incorporation of Mamba will result in a
reduction in FPS, the model parameters and computational
complexity can be maintained at an optimal level, and the
accuracy will also be enhanced in urban scene segmentation
tasks.
6) Loss Function Choice: During the training process, the
loss function facilitates the network’s adjustment of weights
through backpropagation, thereby reducing the prediction
error. In this context, two distinct loss functions and their
combinations were tested on the Vaihingen and Potsdam
datasets, with the resulting numerical outcomes presented in
Table III. The findings indicate that, on the Vaihingen dataset,
Dice Loss alone exhibited superior performance, while on
the Potsdam dataset, SCE Loss demonstrated greater efficacy.
In light of these findings, we considered using a combination
of SCE Loss and Dice Loss for remote sensing image scene
segmentation. As illustrated in Table III, the combination of
SCE loss and Dice loss, with a weight coefficient of 1:1, yields
the highest scores for various indicators.

D. Comparative Experimental Results
1) Comparison of Network Parameters: In the context of
remote sensing image semantic segmentation, the parameter
size, complexity and speed of the network are also crucial
evaluation indicators. In response, a comparison is made
between UMFormer and lightweight semantic segmentation
networks, including the number of model parameters (M), the
FLOPs, and the FPS. The comparison results are shown in
Fig. 7.
The figure indicates that the proposed UMFormer achieves
the highest mIoU of 67.6% while possessing only 12.4 M
parameters. In comparison to CoaT and UNetFormer, the
parameter of UMFormer has been increased by 1.3 M and
0.7 M, respectively, while simultaneously demonstrating an
mIoU increase of 1.9% and 1.0%. Furthermore, the UMFormer
exhibits a significant advantage in terms of its performance
on the FLOPs. In comparison to BoTNet and UNetFormer,
the FLOPS of UMFormer is 47.7G, while the mIoU has
been increased by 4.5% and 1.0%, respectively. The preceding evidence demonstrates that UMFormer is capable
of maintaining the accuracy of remote sensing image segmentation while having fewer parameters and computational
complexity. In the context of limited computational resources,
UMFormer is capable of completing the task with fewer
resources. It is pertinent to note that UMFormer does not
yield optimal outcomes in terms of frame rate. In this
instance, it is possible to utilize the parallel computing
capabilities of hardware, such as multi-threading, to process
reasoning tasks in parallel, thereby enhancing the reasoning
speed.
2) Numerical and Visual Results on UAVid: The UAVid
dataset is a large-scale semantic segmentation dataset composed of different urban street view photographs taken from

Authorized licensed use limited to: Wuhan University. Downloaded on July 01,2025 at 11:31:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LI et al.: LIGHTWEIGHT SEMANTIC SEGMENTATION NETWORK BASED ON SELF-ATTENTION MECHANISM

4703215

TABLE IV
Q UANTITATIVE C OMPARISON R ESULTS OF THE UAV ID T ESTING S ET W ITH S TATE - OF - THE -A RT N ETWORKS . T HE B EST
VALUE IN THE C OLUMN I S S HOWN IN B OLD , AND THE S ECOND VALUES I S U NDERLINED

Fig. 8. Visualization of the UAVid validation set. The first column represents the original images. The second column represents the ground truth. The third
column represents the UNetFormer segmentation results. The fourth column represents the segmentation results of our method.

the overhead perspective of autonomous aerial vehicles. The
dataset presents a significant challenge in achieving optimal
results due to its overhead view angles and complex urban
scenes. A comparison of UMFormer and three types of
advanced semantic segmentation networks on the dataset is
presented. The specific results are presented in Table IV. The
UMFormer achieves the highest mIoU score, 67.6%, which
represents the current state-of-the-art result. To be specific,
UMFormer outperforms CNN-based methods (ABCNet) by
3.8%, Transformer-based methods (UNetFormer) by 1.2%, and
Mamba-based methods (UrbanSSF-T) by 1.9%, respectively.
In addition, UMFormer also demonstrates satisfactory results
for each class. In particular, the segmentation of small category objects (StaticCar) exceeds the second value by 3.2%,
respectively.
As shown in Fig. 8, the segmentation results obtained
from the representative network UNetFormer and the proposed UMFormer are visually displayed and compared. The

UNetFormer employs a hybrid architecture comprising CNN
and Transformer, which enables the effective processing of
both global and local information, and the generation of
high-quality segmentation results. However, as can be seen
from the first and second rows of Fig. 8, the processing of
global information by UNetFormer is still not sufficiently
refined to effectively combat interference information, resulting in discontinuous segmentation. From the third row, it can
be observed that UNetFormer incorrectly identifies the moving
vehicle on the road as a stationary vehicle, failing to capture
the inter-object dependencies. The UMFormer is capable of
capturing diverse global information at varying scales, thereby
complementing each other to facilitate a more comprehensive
understanding of long-distance context and interobject dependencies. This enables UMFormer to effectively handle both
cases and obtain superior segmentation results.
3) Numerical and Visual Results on the Vaihingen and
Potsdam Dataset: The Vaihingen and Potsdam datasets of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Wuhan University. Downloaded on July 01,2025 at 11:31:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4703215

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

TABLE V
Q UANTITATIVE C OMPARISON R ESULTS OF THE VAIHINGEN T ESTING S ET W ITH S TATE - OF - THE -A RT N ETWORKS . T HE B EST
VALUE IN THE C OLUMN I S S HOWN IN B OLD , AND THE S ECOND VALUES I S U NDERLINED

Fig. 9. Visualization of the Vaihingen validation set. The columns from left to right are: original images, ground truth, segmentation results of ABCNet,
segmentation results of UNetFormer, segmentation results of Mamba-UNet, and segmentation results of ours.

ISPRS have been extensively utilized for semantic segmentation tasks in the domain of remote sensing. Researchers have
employed a number of methods on these two datasets, which
have produced high accuracy in these datasets. Consequently,
achieving a leading score on top of that is a challenging
endeavor.
As illustrated in Table V, we present the numerical
results of the proposed UMFormer in comparison to other
lightweight networks on the Vaihingen dataset. Among them,
the UMFormer demonstrated the most favorable MeanF1, OA,
and mIoU, which were significantly superior to those achieved
by CNN-based methods. Furthermore, it demonstrates a fairly

good result over Transformer-based and Mamba-based methods. It is noteworthy that the UMFormer achieved the highest
score of F1_source compared with other Transformer-based
methods on Impervious surfaces, outperforming other methods
by a margin of more than 4%. Moreover, the other categories
also exhibited satisfactory performance. Some representative
networks were selected from three types of segmentation
networks based on different methods for visual comparison
with UMFormer, as illustrated in Fig. 9. The figure illustrates
that UMFormer can achieve superior outcomes in regions that
are challenging to other networks of three types. In lines
1 and 2, the low-vegetation category is obscured by the shadow

Authorized licensed use limited to: Wuhan University. Downloaded on July 01,2025 at 11:31:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LI et al.: LIGHTWEIGHT SEMANTIC SEGMENTATION NETWORK BASED ON SELF-ATTENTION MECHANISM

4703215

TABLE VI
Q UANTITATIVE C OMPARISON R ESULTS OF THE P OTSDAM T ESTING S ET W ITH S TATE - OF - THE -A RT N ETWORKS . T HE B EST
VALUE IN THE C OLUMN I S S HOWN IN B OLD , AND THE S ECOND VALUES I S U NDERLINED

Fig. 10. Visualization of the Potsdam validation set. The columns from left to right are: original images, ground truth, segmentation results of MAResU-Net,
segmentation results of UNetFormer, segmentation results of Swin-UMamba, and segmentation results of ours.

cast upon the ground by the building category, which renders
other segmentation methods unable to achieve satisfactory

results. The UMFormer not only models global information
but also supplements a great deal of local information, thus

Authorized licensed use limited to: Wuhan University. Downloaded on July 01,2025 at 11:31:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4703215

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

ensuring that it can perfectly deal with this kind of situation.
In line 3, the alternative methodologies all erroneously identified the building category as the impervious surfaces category.
This discrepancy can be attributed to the fact that the two
classes are of a similar color, which has resulted in confusion.
The segmentation results of UMFormer approximate the true
labels, which proves the superiority of our method.
Numerical results of UMFormer and other lightweight networks on the Potsdam dataset are presented in Table VI. The
results demonstrate that UMFormer continues to achieve the
highest MeanF1 (92.0%), OA (90.9%), and mIoU (85.5%) on
this dataset. Furthermore, the UMFormer demonstrates satisfactory performance in the classification of the five categories
of objects presented in Table VI. A visual presentation of
the UMFormer and other representative network segmentation
results is presented in Fig. 10. From lines 1 and 2, it can be
seen that UMFormer has the potential to effectively reduce the
occurrence of misclassified object cases. The results presented
in lines 3–5 demonstrate that when the edges of different
types of objects are not readily apparent, the UMFormer
is still capable of effectively distinguishing between edges
and performing precise segmentation. This indicates that our
network retains its capacity for robust feature extraction in the
context of complex environments.
V. C ONCLUSION
In this article, an efficient hybrid architecture (UMFormer)
was proposed that integrates the respective advantages of
CNN, Transformer, and Mamba for semantic segmentation
of remote sensing images. Specifically, CNN is employed
as an encoder in order to guarantee the network is capable
of modeling the local information present within the input
image. In order to ensure the extraction of global information
from objects of different sizes in remote sensing images,
MSAM is designed to utilize the multi-scale feature information output by the encoder for self-attention. The IIA is
employed to fuse the encoder and decoder output feature
maps in order to reconstruct the feature maps, thereby reinforcing the most important information. Furthermore, in order
to facilitate the integration of global and local information,
we developed the GL-VSS block, which is based on the
Mamba architecture. In the GL-VSS block, the global context
information in the image is extracted by applying the state
space models as the main branch, while the auxiliary branch
is designed to supplement the local information. Finally,
the cosine similarity is employed to reinforce the analogous
elements of the global and local information, thereby yielding
the final output feature map. A series of ablation and comparison experiments on three datasets of UAVid, Vaihingen,
and Potsdam demonstrate the efficiency and accuracy of
UMFormer in the field of remote sensing image semantic
segmentation.
While the addition of Mamba to our network does enhance
its feature extraction capabilities and reduce its computational
complexity, there are still limitations to be considered. The
FPS remains at a relatively low level in comparison to existing
lightweight networks. In future research, we will continue to
focus on the light weighting of the network and continue to

optimize the model structure in order to achieve the requirements of real-time urban scene segmentation. Furthermore,
we will investigate the potential of Mamba in computer vision
tasks with a view to explore broader application prospects.
R EFERENCES
[1] L.-C. Chen, G. Papandreou, I. Kokkinos, K. Murphy, and A. L. Yuille,
“DeepLab: Semantic image segmentation with deep convolutional nets,
atrous convolution, and fully connected CRFs,” IEEE Trans. Pattern
Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 834–848, Apr. 2018.
[2] J. Sherrah, “Fully convolutional networks for dense semantic labelling
of high-resolution aerial imagery,” 2016, arXiv:1606.02585.
[3] N. Audebert, B. Le Saux, and S. Lefèvre, “Beyond RGB: Very high
resolution urban remote sensing with multimodal deep networks,” ISPRS
J. Photogramm. Remote Sens., vol. 140, pp. 20–32, Jun. 2018.
[4] X. Li, C. Wen, L. Wang, and Y. Fang, “Geometry-aware segmentation
of remote sensing images via joint height estimation,” IEEE Geosci.
Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 19, 2022, Art. no. 8007905.
[5] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. NIPS, 2017,
pp. 6000–6010.
[6] A. Dosovitskiy et al., “An image is worth 16×16 words: Transformers
for image recognition at scale,” 2020, arXiv:2010.11929.
[7] J. Chen et al., “TransUNet: Transformers make strong encoders for
medical image segmentation,” 2021, arXiv:2102.04306.
[8] H. Cao et al., “Swin-UNet: UNet-like pure transformer for medical image segmentation,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV),
Jan. 2022, pp. 205–218.
[9] A. Gu and T. Dao, “Mamba: Linear-time sequence modeling with
selective state spaces,” 2023, arXiv:2312.00752.
[10] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for
image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 770–778.
[11] L. Zhu, B. Liao, Q. Zhang, X. Wang, W. Liu, and X. Wang, “Vision
mamba: Efficient visual representation learning with bidirectional state
space model,” 2024, arXiv:2401.09417.
[12] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox, “U-net: Convolutional networks
for biomedical image segmentation,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Med. Image
Comput. Comput.-Assisted Intervent (MICCAI), Jan. 2015, pp. 234–241.
[13] A. Chaurasia and E. Culurciello, “LinkNet: Exploiting encoder representations for efficient semantic segmentation,” IEEE Vis. Commun. Image
Process. (VCIP), Dec. 2017, pp. 1–4.
[14] X. Qin, Z. Zhang, C. Huang, M. Dehghan, O. R. Zaiane, and M. Jagersand, “U2-net: Going deeper with nested U-structure for salient object
detection,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 106, Oct. 2020, Art. no. 107404.
[15] F. I. Diakogiannis, F. Waldner, P. Caccetta, and C. Wu, “ResUNeta: A deep learning framework for semantic segmentation of remotely
sensed data,” ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens., vol. 162, pp. 94–114,
Apr. 2020.
[16] L. Wang et al., “UNetFormer: A UNet-like transformer for efficient
semantic segmentation of remote sensing urban scene imagery,” ISPRS
J. Photogramm. Remote Sens., vol. 190, pp. 196–214, Jul. 2022.
[17] Z. Liu et al., “Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using
shifted windows,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV),
Oct. 2021, pp. 9992–10002.
[18] E. Xie et al., “SegFormer: Simple and efficient design for semantic
segmentation with transformers,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Sys.
(NIPS), vol. 34, Dec. 2021, pp. 12077–12090.
[19] D. Y. Fu, T. Dao, K. K. Saab, A. W. Thomas, A. Rudra, and C. Ré,
“Hungry hungry hippos: Towards language modeling with state space
models,” 2022, arXiv:2212.14052.
[20] Z. Wang, J.-Q. Zheng, Y. Zhang, G. Cui, and L. Li, “Mamba-UNet:
UNet-like pure visual mamba for medical image segmentation,” 2024,
arXiv:2402.05079.
[21] J. Liu et al., “Swin-UMamba: Mamba-based UNet with imagenet-based
pretraining,” 2024, arXiv:2402.03302.
[22] J. Ruan, J. Li, and S. Xiang, “VM-UNet: Vision mamba UNet for
medical image segmentation,” 2024, arXiv:2402.02491.
[23] S. Zhao, H. Chen, X. Zhang, P. Xiao, L. Bai, and W. Ouyang,
“RS-mamba for large remote sensing image dense prediction,” 2024,
arXiv:2404.02668.
[24] X. Ma, X. Zhang, and M.-O. Pun, “RS3 Mamba: Visual state space model
for remote sensing image semantic segmentation,” IEEE Geosci. Remote.
Sens. Lett., vol. 21, 2024, Art. no. 6011405.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Wuhan University. Downloaded on July 01,2025 at 11:31:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LI et al.: LIGHTWEIGHT SEMANTIC SEGMENTATION NETWORK BASED ON SELF-ATTENTION MECHANISM

[25] J. Chen, J. Yi, A. Chen, and H. Lin, “SRCBTFusion-net: An efficient
fusion architecture via stacked residual convolution blocks and transformer for remote sensing image semantic segmentation,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 4411716.
[26] R. Strudel, R. Garcia, I. Laptev, and C. Schmid, “Segmenter: Transformer for semantic segmentation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf.
Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2021, pp. 7242–7252.
[27] J. Ma, F. Li, and B. Wang, “U-mamba: Enhancing long-range dependency for biomedical image segmentation,” 2024, arXiv:2401.04722.
[28] W. Xu and Y. Wan, “ELA: Efficient local attention for deep convolutional neural networks,” 2024, arXiv:2403.01123.
[29] R. Wu, Y. Liu, P. Liang, and Q. Chang, “UltraLight VM-UNet: Parallel
vision mamba significantly reduces parameters for skin lesion segmentation,” 2024, arXiv:2403.20035.
[30] C. Luo, J. Zhan, and X. Xue, “Cosine normalization: Using cosine
similarity instead of dot product in neural networks,” in Artificial
Neural Networks and Machine Learning—ICANN. Cham, Switzerland:
Springer, Sep. 2018.
[31] Y. Lyu, G. Vosselman, G.-S. Xia, A. Yilmaz, and M. Y. Yang, “UAVid: A
semantic segmentation dataset for UAV imagery,” ISPRS J. Photogramm.
Remote Sens., vol. 165, pp. 108–119, Jul. 2020.
[32] M. Oršic´ and S. Šegvić, “Efficient semantic segmentation with pyramidal
fusion,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 110, Feb. 2021, Art. no. 107611.
[33] R. Li et al., “Multiattention network for semantic segmentation of fineresolution remote sensing images,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5607713.
[34] R. Li, S. Zheng, C. Zhang, C. Duan, L. Wang, and P. M. Atkinson,
“ABCNet: Attentive bilateral contextual network for efficient semantic
segmentation of fine-resolution remotely sensed imagery,” ISPRS J.
Photogramm. Remote Sens., vol. 181, pp. 84–98, Nov. 2021.
[35] P. Hu et al., “Real-time semantic segmentation with fast attention,” IEEE
Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 263–270, Jan. 2021.
[36] X. Zheng, L. Huan, G.-S. Xia, and J. Gong, “Parsing very high resolution
urban scene images by learning deep ConvNets with edge-aware loss,”
ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens., vol. 170, pp. 15–28, Dec. 2020.
[37] R. Li, S. Zheng, C. Duan, J. Su, and C. Zhang, “Multistage attention ResU-net for semantic segmentation of fine-resolution remote
sensing images,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 19, 2022,
Art. no. 8009205.
[38] X. Li, L. Xie, C. Wang, J. Miao, H. Shen, and L. Zhang,
“Boundary-enhanced dual-stream network for semantic segmentation of
high-resolution remote sensing images,” GISci. Remote Sens., vol. 61,
no. 1, Dec. 2024, Art. no. 2356355.
[39] B. Li, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, B. Li, and Z. Li, “Dual-path feature fusion
network for semantic segmentation of remote sensing images,” IEEE
Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 21, 2024, Art. no. 2503205.
[40] L. Wang, R. Li, D. Wang, C. Duan, T. Wang, and X. Meng, “Transformer meets convolution: A bilateral awareness network for semantic
segmentation of very fine resolution urban scene images,” Remote Sens.,
vol. 13, no. 16, p. 3065, Aug. 2021.
[41] A. Srinivas, T.-Y. Lin, N. Parmar, J. Shlens, P. Abbeel, and
A. Vaswani, “Bottleneck transformers for visual recognition,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021,
pp. 16514–16524.
[42] W. Xu, Y. Xu, T. Chang, and Z. Tu, “Co-scale conv-attentional image
transformers,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV),
Oct. 2021, pp. 9961–9970.
[43] H. Wu, P. Huang, and M. Zhang, “CMTFNet: CNN and multiscale transformer fusion network for remote sensing image semantic
segmentation,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023,
Art. no. 2004612.
[44] X. Wang, Y. Zhang, T. Lei, Y. Wang, Y. Zhai, and A. K. Nandi,
“Dynamic convolution self-attention network for land-cover classification in VHR remote-sensing images,” Remote Sens., vol. 14, no. 19,
p. 4941, Oct. 2022.
[45] W. Lu, S.-B. Chen, Q.-L. Shu, J. Tang, and B. Luo, “DecoupleNet:
A lightweight backbone network with efficient feature decoupling for
remote sensing visual tasks,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62,
2024, Art. no. 4414613.
[46] X. Zhang, Z. Weng, P. Zhu, X. Han, J. Zhu, and L. Jiao, “ESDINet:
Efficient shallow-deep interaction network for semantic segmentation
of high-resolution aerial images,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5607615.

4703215

[47] Z. Wang, J. Yi, A. Chen, L. Chen, H. Lin, and K. Xu, “Accurate semantic
segmentation of very high-resolution remote sensing images considering
feature state sequences: From benchmark datasets to urban applications,”
ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens., vol. 220, pp. 824–840, Feb. 2025.

Langping Li received the B.S. degree in computer
science and technology from the Central South
University of Forestry and Technology, Changsha,
China, in 2022, where he is currently pursuing
the M.S. degree in computer technology with the
College of Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies.
His research interests include computer vision and
very high resolution (VHR) remote sensing semantic
segmentation.

Jizheng Yi (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
degree from the School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing,
China, in 2015.
He worked at the Medical Image Processing
Group, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
PA, USA, from 2018 to 2019. He is currently a
Professor with the College of Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, Central South University of Forestry
and Technology, Changsha, China. He is chairing
some research projects. He has authored one book
and more than 50 articles. His research interests include computer vision,
very high resolution (VHR) remote sensing image classification, and semantic
segmentation.

Hui Fan received the M.S. degree from the
Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
Wuhan, China, in 2008, and the Ph.D. degree from
the University of National Defense Science and
Technology, Changsha, China, in 2021.
In 2014, she joined the Central South University of Forestry and Technology, Changsha.
Her research interests include artificial intelligence,
smart ecological remote sensing, target detection,
and recognition.

Hui Lin received the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees
from the Central South University of Forestry and
Technology, Changsha, China, in 1988, 1991, and
2005, respectively.
She worked as a Visiting Scholar with the College of Forestry, University of Toronto, Toronto,
ON, Canada, from 1999 to 2000. She is currently
a Professor with the Central South University of
Forestry and Technology and the Director of the Key
Laboratory on Forest Resources Management and
Monitoring in Southern China of National Forestry
and Grassland Administration. Her research interests include forest management, forestry remote sensing, and geographic information systems.
Dr. Lin is also the Director of China Remote Sensing Application Association and the Computer Application Branch of China Forestry Society. She
is also the Winner of the Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars in
Hunan Province.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Wuhan University. Downloaded on July 01,2025 at 11:31:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

