Statistical Characteristic-Guided Denoising for
Rapid High-Resolution Transmission Electron Microscopy Imaging
Hesong Li1 Ziqi Wu1 Ruiwen Shao1 Ying Fu1†
1
Beijing Institute of Technology

arXiv:2603.18834v1 [cs.CV] 19 Mar 2026

{lihesong2,wuziqi,rwshao,fuying}@bit.edu.cn

Abstract
High-Resolution Transmission Electron Microscopy
(HRTEM) enables atomic-scale observation of nucleation
dynamics, which boosts the studies of advanced solid materials. Nonetheless, due to the millisecond-scale rapid
change of nucleation, it requires short-exposure rapid imaging, leading to severe noise that obscures atomic positions.
In this work, we propose a statistical characteristic-guided
denoising network, which utilizes statistical characteristics to guide the denoising process in both spatial and frequency domains. In the spatial domain, we present spatial
deviation-guided weighting to select appropriate convolution operations for each spatial position based on deviation
characteristic. In the frequency domain, we present frequency band-guided weighting to enhance signals and suppress noise based on band characteristics. We also develop
an HRTEM-specific noise calibration method and generate
a dataset with disordered structures and realistic HRTEM
image noises. It can ensure the denoising performance of
models on real images for nucleation observation. Experiments on synthetic and real data show our method outperforms the state-of-the-art methods in HRTEM image denoising, with effectiveness in the localization downstream
task. Code will be available at https://github.com/
HeasonLee/SCGN .

1. Introduction
The nucleation process of amorphous-to-crystalline transformation is a key mechanism in the formation of many
solid materials. It has become an emerging research trend in
advanced materials such as graphene [16], diamond [6], and
metal catalysts [4]. The physical properties of these materials are closely related to the dynamic changes of atomicscale structures. These dynamic processes usually occur on
† Corresponding author.

a millisecond time scale, thus requiring rapid imaging at the
atomic level for observation.
High-Resolution Transmission Electron Microscopy
(HRTEM) imaging [8] enables the capture of transient
atomic dynamics during nucleation, providing an essential
basis for understanding the formation mechanisms of advanced materials. However, short exposure times cause
image signals to be submerged by various types of noise,
making it difficult to identify atomic positions. Therefore,
HRTEM image denoising is important for analyzing the nucleation process.
Traditional denoising methods, such as the Gaussian filter, cannot restore the correct atomic structure from strong
HRTEM noise. With the development of deep learning,
some existing methods [22, 25] achieve denoising for crystal structures through convolutional neural networks. However, their denoising performance for the nucleation process is limited by networks and data. For network design,
existing methods typically apply uniform processing to the
overall features of the spatial or frequency domain. While
in rapid imaging of disordered structures, they struggle to
distinguish between signals and noise. For data, the ideal
ground truth cannot be obtained through imaging, and there
is a lack of denoising datasets for the nucleation process,
which needs noise calibration specifically for HRTEM and
simulation of disordered atomic arrangements. To summarize, a denoising network and a dataset specifically designed
for nucleation observation are necessary.
In this work, we propose statistical characteristicguided denoising for nucleation observation with rapid
HRTEM imaging. Specifically, we first present statistical
characteristic-guided weighting modules. Inspired by the
traditional Yau-Yau filtering [44], which can effectively remove noise of non-linear systems via statistical characteristics of noise, our characteristic-guided weighting modules
utilize statistical characteristics to guide the denoising process in both spatial and frequency domains. In the spatial
domain, signals and noise at different positions exhibit distinct fluctuation characteristics, requiring different convolution operations for denoising. Thus, we introduce spatial

deviation-guided weighting to select appropriate convolution operations for each spatial position based on the deviation characteristic. In the frequency domain, signals and
noise are typically distributed in different frequency bands.
Thus, we design frequency band-guided weighting to enhance signals and suppress noise based on band characteristics. Besides, we present an HRTEM-specific noise calibration method to generate a dataset with complex disordered
structures and realistic noise for the observation of nucleation. It can boost our network’s performance on real data.
Experiments on synthetic and real data show our method
outperforms the state-of-the-art methods in HRTEM image denoising, with effectiveness in the localization downstream task.
In summary, our main contributions are that we
• Present spatial deviation-guided weighting, which can
select appropriate convolutions for each spatial position
based on the deviation characteristic;
• Present frequency band-guided weighting, which can enhance signals and suppress noise in the frequency domain
based on band characteristics;
• Develop an HRTEM-specific noise calibration method to
generate a dataset with complex disordered structures and
realistic noise for observation of nucleation.

2. Related Work
Atomic image denoising methods. Atomic image denoising methods are divided into two categories, i.e., traditional
methods and deep learning methods. Traditional methods
remove noise from images using traditional denoising methods such as the Gaussian filter, Wiener filter [42], and bilateral filter [35]. For the observation of nucleation, extremely
low signal-to-noise ratios usually render traditional methods ineffective. Recently, deep learning is widely used in
image processing [9–15, 21, 23, 24, 34, 38, 43, 46, 47, 49–
52]. For atomic image denoising, some methods [4, 20,
22, 25] learn the structural features of atomic arrangements
from data through supervised or unsupervised learning. A
fully convolutional network [20] is used for denoising and
identifying atomic deletions and replacements. AtomSegNet [25] is a convolutional neural network based on UNet
architecture [31] and plays a key role in studies on new battery materials [36, 37, 45]. UDVD [4] removes noise interference through unsupervised learning between multiple
frames, but struggles to get clear atomic contours. SFIN
[22] achieves better crystal atomic denoising results by incorporating frequency-domain processing into the network
to utilize the strong frequency-domain features brought by
the periodic arrangement of atoms. However, existing methods usually perform the same processing on all the features
and cannot highlight atomic features from strong noise, resulting in limited denoising effects in observing nucleation.

50

Noise

40

3×3 SD

FFT

30
20

(a) Spatial Deviation

16
12
8
6

10
0

Signal

18

4

(b) Frequency Band

Figure 1. Visualization of the two kinds of statistical characteristics that we used to guide the denoising process. (a) The spatial
deviation characteristic obtained by calculating the pixel standard
deviation (SD) within 3 × 3 windows. It reflects the fluctuation
conditions of different spatial positions in the image. (b) The frequency band characteristic obtained by the Fast Fourier Transform
(FFT). Signal and noise are distributed at different frequency band
positions and have different patterns.

Atomic image denoising datasets. Due to the difficulty
of obtaining ideal ground truths in actual experiments, synthetic datasets provide data support for deep learning-based
denoising methods. The abTEM library [26] and the ReciPro software [32] can simulate clean HRTEM images
based on crystal structure files, but they struggle to simulate complex noises and the randomly disordered atomic arrangements during nucleation. The TEMImageNet dataset
[25] contains simulated noisy images and label images for
transmission electron microscope image enhancement and
atomic localization tasks. It includes several ordered atomic
structures and incorporates scan noise, pointwise noise,
and background with random parameters. SFIN dataset
[22] simulates image noise using calibrated real parameters
of Scanning Transmission Electron Microscopy (STEM)
[28, 29], which improves the reality of the simulated data
and the performance of atom-level image denoising. However, different from STEM with pixel-by-pixel scanning,
observation of nucleation requires HRTEM with more rapid
global diffraction imaging. Therefore, HRTEM has different noise characteristics from STEM. In summary, there is
currently a lack of noise calibration methods specifically for
HRTEM, as well as datasets containing disordered structures for denoising of the nucleation process.

3. Method
In this section, we first formally define the HRTEM denoising problem and explain the motivation of our method.
Then, we introduce our statistical characteristic-guided
network with spatial deviation-guided weighting and frequency band-guided weighting. Finally, we introduce our
data generation method for the observation of nucleation.

3.1. Formulation and Motivation
The goal of HRTEM image denoising for the nucleation
process is to restore the atomic structures from noisy
HRTEM images, thereby analyzing the transition of atomic
arrangement from disordered to ordered. Given a noisy image data I noisy ∈ RH×W ×1 , it is required to generate a clean

Frequency

···

⊕

Conv-3

⊕

SFEB

Conv-3

⊕

⊙

Spatial-Frquency
Enhancement Block

SFEB
Concat

Split

SFEB

Input

Conv-3

Spatial

FBGW SDGW
BN
BN
ReLU ReLU
FBGW SDGW
BN
BN
ReLU ReLU

Statistical Characteristic-Guided Network

(×n)

3×3
Convolustion

⊕

Conv-1

Element-wise
Addition

Output

Band Characteristic F''

⊕

⊙
Wb

IRFFT

Band Coupling
Conv-1

Band
Position

Wd

Conv-1
ReLU
Conv-1
Sigmoid

RFFT

⊙

Band
Content

MAX AVG
Pool Pool

y31 y32 y33

Deviation Characteristic

Sigmoid

x31 x32 x33

y11 y12 y13

Standard y y y
Deviation 21 22 23

Conv-1

x11 x12 x13
x21 x22 x23

F'

Conv-1

Band Decoupling
F

1×1
Convolustion

BN

(a) Spatial Deviation-Guided Weighting (SDGW) (b) Frequency Band-Guided Weighting (FBGW)
Conv-3

Conv-3

Element-wise
Product

Batch
Normalization

(I) RFFT

(Invert) Real
Fast Fourier
Transform

Figure 2. The framework of our statistical-characteristic guided network. It enhances signals and suppresses noise in the spatial and
frequency domains using spatial deviation-guided weighting and frequency band-guided weighting, respectively.

image I clean ∈ RH×W ×1 , i.e.,
I clean = G(I noisy )

(1)

where G is the denoising method. The clean image I clean has
a black background, with a clear white dot at the location of
each atom. High-speed imaging required for nucleation observation results in an extremely low signal-to-noise ratio
of the input image I noisy . Existing networks [22, 25] tend to
mistake noise in the image for valid signals, leading to incorrect positions or missing atoms in the output clean image
I clean . This challenge comes from two aspects, i.e., network
and dataset.
For network, in HRTEM images, intense noise is mixed
with signals, making it difficult to distinguish signals from
noise through ordinary convolution operations applied to
the entire feature map. Yau-Yau filter [44] is a traditional
nonlinear filtering algorithm, whose filtering operations is
specifically based on the statistical characteristics of signals and noise, effectively extracting signals from nonlinear
systems. Inspired by this, we use statistical characteristics
to guide the network in identifying signals and noise. Recent studies [2, 3, 5, 7, 22] have proved the advantages of
spatial and frequency domain processing and information
fusion, especially for atom-level images [22]. Therefore,
we consider describing signals and noise using statistical
characteristics in both spatial and frequency domains. As
shown in Figure 1(a), spatial deviation reflects the fluctuation conditions of different spatial positions in the image.
Thus, spatial deviation can guide the network to perform
different convolution operations on different spatial positions, thereby adapting to local regions with varying fluctuation characteristics. As shown in Figure 1(b), signals and
noises are usually distributed in different frequency bands.
Thus, frequency band positions and contents can guide the
network to enhance signals and suppress noise. Based on
above analysis, we compute dynamic weights for each component according to spatial deviation and frequency band,

and guide the denoising process using these weights.
For dataset, existing datasets are not suitable for the denoising task of HRTEM images in the nucleation process.
First, the nucleation process requires observing the transformation of materials from an amorphous to a crystalline
state, where most atomic arrangements are disordered or
semi-disordered [4, 6, 16]. Deep learning techniques have
recently been applied to atomic-scale image denoising, and
existing methods primarily focus on denoising crystalline
images. Thus, most synthetic datasets [25] consist of fully
ordered crystalline atomic structures, excluding the disordered structures required for nucleation. Second, the noise
distribution of existing datasets is inconsistent with that of
real HRTEM images. Studies on natural image denoising
[40, 41] have proven that noise calibration helps synthesize
more realistic noisy images and improve denoising performance. For atomic-scale images, most datasets [17, 25] randomly set noise parameters without calibration. Although
SFIN dataset [22] calibrates STEM images, due to differences in imaging principles, the noise type and distribution
of HRTEM are different from those of STEM. For example, HRTEM has column noise that STEM does not possess,
while lacking the scan noise unique to STEM. Thus, direct
use of existing datasets cannot guarantee noise adaptability.
To address the above two issues, we generate disordered
structures specific to the nucleation process and design a
noise calibration method tailored for HRTEM.

3.2. Overall Architecture
The periodicity of atomic arrangements forms strong signals in the frequency domain, making it easy to distinguish
overall signals from noise in the frequency domain. In contrast, the spatial domain facilitates the restoration of local
features in different parts of the image. Therefore, we design the spatial-frequency enhancement block, which leverages the advantages of both domains to enhance image features. Specifically, as shown in Figure 2, our statisticalcharacteristic guided network first extracts C-channel shal-

low features of a noisy HRTEM image I noisy ∈ RH×W ×1
using a 3 × 3 convolution. It then uses n spatial-frequency
enhancement blocks with residual connections to gradually
denoise and enhance the features. Finally, a 3 × 3 convolution fuses different features to generate a clean output image
I clean ∈ RH×W ×1 .
Within each spatial-frequency enhancement block, the
image features with C channels are split equally into two
parts, each with C/2 channels. One part is used for enhancement in the spatial domain, while the other is used for
enhancement in the frequency domain. In the spatial domain enhancement branch, we employ a convolution module with our spatial deviation-guided weighting to perform
enhancement twice. In the frequency domain branch, we
employ a convolution module with our frequency bandguided weighting to perform enhancement twice. The enhanced results from the two branches are finally concatenated along the channel dimension, and a 3 × 3 convolution
is applied to fuse features across different channels.

3.3. Spatial Deviation-Guided Weighting
We present a spatial deviation-guided weighting module,
which can select appropriate convolution operations for
each spatial position based on the deviation characteristic.
Deviation characteristic extraction. Using different convolution operations for local regions with varying fluctuation characteristics can ensure the adaptability of denoising
to noise conditions at different image positions. The standard deviation of pixels within a small window can reflect
the local fluctuation in the image. Unlike linear statistics
such as image gradients and means, the calculation of standard deviation involves nonlinear operations (e.g., computing the second moment includes squaring). Thus, it cannot
be extracted through ordinary convolutions. We design a
window-based standard deviation module that can be embedded in convolutional networks. The local standard deviation of a single-channel feature map is defined as the
standard deviation of pixel value distribution within a 3 × 3
window, i.e.,
q
SD(X) = E[X 2 ] − E[X]2 + ϵ
(2)
where the first moment E[X] is the mean of pixels in the
window, which can be achieved via a 3×3 convolution with
a fixed kernel. The second moment E[X 2 ] is obtained by
squaring each element of X and then calculating the windowed mean. ϵ = 10−5 is a small positive number introduced to ensure the expression under the square root remains positive during numerical calculations. For image
edges, mirror padding is applied to add a one-pixel edge before the two 3 × 3 convolutions. This ensures the physical
meaning of the standard deviation at edge positions remains
unchanged. For each channel of the input feature map with

C channels, the 3 × 3 window standard deviation is calculated using Equation (2), ultimately yielding a standard
deviation feature map with C channels.
Weighting process. Using different convolution operations for different spatial positions is equivalent to applying a set of convolution operations to all spatial positions,
followed by assigning different weights to the results of
these operations. As shown in Figure 2(a), our spatial
deviation-guided weighting consists of two branches. The
upper branch extracts features using a 3 × 3 convolution,
where different channels represent distinct convolution operations. The lower branch generates the dynamic weight
W d ∈ RH×W ×C/2 based on the extracted standard deviation feature map through a 1 × 1 convolution and a sigmoid
function. Finally, the feature map from the upper branch
is weighted via element-wise multiplication. In the lower
branch, the 1 × 1 convolution integrates standard deviation
features across different channels to determine weights. The
sigmoid function normalizes the weight values to the range
[0, 1]. For each spatial position, the 1 × 1 convolution and
sigmoid function play as a one-dimensional neural network
composed of a fully connected layer and an activation layer,
which assigns specific weights according to the fluctuation
characteristics of the position.

3.4. Frequency Band-Guided Weighting
We present a frequency band-guided weighting module,
which can enhance signals and suppress noise in the frequency domain based on band characteristics.
Band characteristic extraction. Due to periodic differences, signals and noise are typically distributed in different
frequency bands in the frequency domain. To enhance signals and suppress noise, it is necessary to determine whether
a frequency band is a signal or noise based on its position
and content, and assign corresponding weights accordingly.
To obtain the content of frequency bands, we convert the
image feature F to the frequency domain using the Real
Fast Fourier Transform (RFFT) in Pytorch [27]. Since the
result is a complex tensor F ′ containing imaginary and real
parts, the number of channels becomes 2C. As the feature
map F ′ lacks position coordinate information, we explicitly add a position embedding feature map with two channels, corresponding to the relative coordinate values in the
horizontal and vertical directions, respectively, with values
ranging from 0 to 1. This yields a frequency-domain feature
F ′′ with 2C +2 channels, which includes both band content
and band position information.
Weight computation. As shown in Figure 2(b), after obtaining the band characteristic feature F ′′ , a 1 × 1 convolution is used to decouple frequency bands. This decoupling process assigns frequency band content of different
features to distinct feature channels—some channels repre-

60

Pixel Value
10

20

(c) Fitting of
Pointwise Noise

30

1.0

Noise Intensity

8000

2.0
40

(b) Fitting of
Column Noise

Number

4000
20

(a) HRTEM
Image Noise

Data
Gaussian
Fitting

0

12000

Number

Pixel Value

0

6000

Data
Gaussian
Fitting

Pointwise Noise
& Fitting
Column Noise
& Fitting
10

14

Signal Intensity

(d) Change
of Noises

Figure 3. HRTEM image noises and their calibration. Column
noise and pointwise noise can be fitted with a Gaussian distribution. The intensity of pointwise noise is proportional to the signal
intensity. The intensity of column noise is almost a constant value.

sent valid signals, while others correspond to noise irrelevant to the signals. Subsequently, a frequency band classification module identifies the importance of each channel based on the features of different channels and assigns
appropriate weights. We design this classification module
with reference to the channel attention mechanism [48],
which sequentially includes global pooling, 1 × 1 convolution, ReLU activation, 1 × 1 convolution, and a sigmoid
function. Among these components, global pooling is used
to convert the global information of each channel into a
scalar. We employ average pooling and max pooling, respectively, as the global pooling operations, and sum the results of the two corresponding classification modules. Thus,
each channel of the weight W b ∈ R1×1×C/2 is in the range
of [0, 2]. Weights greater than 1 correspond to enhancement,
while those less than 1 correspond to suppression.
Weighting process. As shown in Figure 2(b), the weighting process involves multiplying each entire channel of F ′′
by its corresponding weight, thereby obtaining each frequency band after enhancement or suppression. These frequency bands are subsequently recoupled into a complete
frequency-domain feature using a 1×1 convolution. Finally,
an inverse real fast Fourier transform from Pytorch [27] is
applied to convert the frequency-domain feature back to the
spatial domain.

3.5. Data Generation
To generate an HRTEM dataset for observing nucleation,
we first generate clean images and then add noise to them.
Clean image generation. Most atoms in the nucleation
process are arranged in a disordered manner, but due to interatomic forces, even the two closest atoms maintain a certain distance. Directly using random dot placement would
cause atomic overlaps, which is inconsistent with real scenarios. To address this issue, we use the Poisson disk sampling [1] to generate the positions of each atom. This algorithm can generate a two-dimensionally distributed point
set with linear complexity, ensuring that the distance between any two points is greater than a threshold (e.g., 4
pixels) while maintaining an overall random arrangement
of all points. Then, binarized 2D Perlin noise [30] is used
as a mask to remove some atomic positions, simulating the

vacuum region outside the material.
After obtaining the position of each atom, each atom is
rendered onto the image as a 2D Gaussian distribution. The
brightness and size of the atoms (i.e., the peak brightness
and standard deviation of the 2D Gaussian distribution), as
well as the background brightness of the image, are all derived from measurements of real HRTEM images, following the SFIN dataset [22]. When generating clean HRTEM
images, the brightness and size of atoms exhibit certain fluctuations to simulate aberrations in the imaging process and
blurring caused by multiple scattering. In contrast, when
generating ground truth maps, the atomic brightness is fixed
at 255, the standard deviation of the normal distribution is
fixed at 0.75, and the image background brightness is fixed
at 0. This ensures that the ground truth is clear.
HRTEM noise calibration and generation.
Most
HRTEMs convert the electron beam transmitted through the
sample into an optical signal using a photoelectric converter
and then receive the optical signal with a CMOS sensor.
The image noise mainly originates from the CMOS sensor,
including dot noise N p (with independent values for each
pixel) and column noise N c (with identical values for all
pixels in a vertical column). The noisy HRTEM image can
be formulated as
I noisy = I clean + N c + N p (I clean )

(3)

where I noisy and I clean are the noisy image and the clean
image, respectively. N p is the pointwise noise related to
the signal intensity I clean .
To calibrate column noise and pointwise noise, we capture six sequences of images of the vacuum region using HRTEM. These images contain only noise without any
atoms, and one example is shown in Figure 3(a). We read
the unadjusted RAW image data from the Electron Microscopy Dataset (EMD) files saved by the Velox software
[33]. Each sequence is captured under a different electron
beam intensity (i.e., signal intensity), ranging from 1 nA to
2 nA with an interval of 0.2 nA. For each sequence, 100
frames are captured to fit the noise parameters. As shown
in Figure 3(b) and Figure 3(c), both the pointwise noise and
column noise in a single image can be well-fitted by a normal distribution. Figure 3(d) shows that the intensity of
pointwise noise is proportional to the signal intensity, while
the intensity of column noise is almost a constant value.
Based on the data from all six sequences, the relationship
between the amplitude of pointwise noise and signal intensity is obtained as
σp (x, y) = 0.03583I clean (x, y) + 1.379

(4)

where σp (x, y) and I clean (x, y) are the standard deviation of
pointwise noise N p and the pixel value of the clean image
I clean at the location (x, y), respectively. The standard devi-

In this section, we first introduce the experimental settings.
Then, we provide the main results of different methods on
HRTEM denoising, as well as their application results on
atomic localization. Finally, we discuss the effectiveness of
our network and dataset.

4.1. Experimental Settings
We first introduce the datasets and metrics. Then, we introduce the comparison methods and implementation details
of our network.
Datasets and metrics. We follow SFIN [22] to compare different methods on both synthetic datasets and real
data. The synthetic datasets are TEMImageNet [25], SFIN
dataset [22], and our NUC dataset for nucleation. The real
data is a sequence of frames actually captured by HRTEM,
which includes the nucleation process of Pt (platinum) transitioning from disordered to ordered. We follow SFIN [22]
to use Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR) and Structural
Similarity Index Measure (SSIM) [39] as metrics.
Comparison methods. We compare our method with the
Gaussian filter, AtomSegNet [25], SFIN [22], HINT [18],
and UDVD [4]. The Gaussian filter is a traditional method.
AtomSegNet, SFIN, and HINT are supervised deep learning
methods. UDVD is an unsupervised deep learning method.
Since UDVD requires multi-frame data as input, comparisons with it are only conducted using multi-frame real data.
Implementation details of our network. Our statistical
characteristic-guided network is trained with Adam optimizer [19] (β1 = 0.9 and β2 = 0.999) and L1 loss for 100
epochs on our dataset NUC (with 1000 pairs of training
data). The block number n = 8, and the channel number
C = 64. The codes are based on PyTorch [27]. The learning rate is set as 2 × 10−4 . Mini-batch size is set to 6, which
ensures that training can finish on a single RTX 3090 GPU.

4.2. Main Results
We compare our Statistical Characteristic-Guided Network
(SCGN) with the state-of-the-art methods on both synthetic
datasets and real data.
Results on synthetic datasets. Figure 4 shows the results on different datasets, including TEMImageNet [25],
SFIN dataset [22], and our NUC dataset. In the results
on TEMImageNet, the result of Gaussian filter is blurry,
while in the results of AtomSegNet [25], SFIN [22], and
HINT [18], some darker atoms cannot be recovered. Our

Gaussian AtomSegNet SFIN

HINT SCGN (Ours)

GT

TEMSFIN
Dataset ImageNet

4. Experiments

Input

NUC
(Ours)

ation of column noise N c is a constant value σc = 0.6641.
Gaussian noise is added to each pixel in the clean image
based on the calibrated noise parameters σp and σc to form
a noisy HRTEM image.

Figure 4. Denoising results on different datasets. Training datasets
correspond to the testing datasets.
Table 1. Denoising results of different methods on different
datasets. Training datasets correspond to the testing datasets. Best
and second best values are bold and underlined, respectively. Our
SCGN achieves the best denoising results.
TEMImageNet [25] SFIN Dataset [22] NUC (Ours)
PSNR ↑ SSIM ↑ PSNR ↑ SSIM ↑ PSNR ↑ SSIM ↑
Gaussian
16.08
0.4991
16.43 0.3267
8.26 0.0207
AtomSegNet [25] [Sci. Rep.’22] 22.34
0.8008
34.33 0.8994 23.44 0.9452
SFIN [22] [CVPR’25]
31.76
0.9543
38.48 0.9582 25.70 0.9673
HINT [18] [ICCV’25]
27.51
0.9031
37.62 0.9541 23.53 0.9441
SCGN (Ours)
32.55
0.9638
38.99 0.9634 26.55 0.9717
Method

SCGN can clearly display both brighter and darker atoms.
In the results on SFIN dataset, only our SCGN clearly distinguishes the two atoms in the lower right part of the image.
In the results on our NUC dataset, the result of Gaussian filter is blurry, while in the results of AtomSegNet, SFIN, and
HINT, an atom is missed. Our SCGN can clearly display all
the atoms. Table 1 shows the quantitative results. Benefiting from the weighting of signals and noise, our SCGN outperforms other methods on both existing datasets and our
dataset. On our NUC dataset, the PSNR exceeds that of the
best-performing SFIN method by 0.85 dB.
Results on real data. The denoising results on real data are
shown in Figure 5. It shows the effects of different methods
and different training datasets. Although the result of Gaussian filtering is free of noise, it is difficult to distinguish
between different atoms. The results of UDVD are even
blurrier than those of the Gaussian filter. The reason is that
the content varies significantly between frames during the
nucleation process, making it difficult to perform mutual supervised learning through adjacent frames. The right parts
of Figure 5(a) and Figure 5(b) show the performance of
different supervised learning methods trained on different
datasets. Results trained using existing datasets can barely
identify atoms. The reason is that the noise distribution of
existing datasets differs from that of HRTEM images, and
they lack densely and disorderly arranged atoms in the nucleation process. As shown in the last row, our noise calibration method and disordered atom generation method enable most networks to recover atomic structures from real
HRTEM images. As marked by the red boxes, the denoising results of the AtomSegNet [25], SFIN [22], and HINT
[18] contain various errors, such as missing atoms, extra

HINT

SCGN (Ours)
Input

SFIN

HINT

SCGN (Ours)

NUC (Ours)

UDVD

NUC (Ours)

Gaussian

Input
Gaussian
UDVD

AtomSegNet
SFIN Dataset TEMImageNet

SFIN

SFIN Dataset TEMImageNet

AtomSegNet

(a) Disordered Structure

(b) Ordered Structure

Figure 5. Denoising results on real data. Gaussian filter is a traditional method. UDVD [4] is an unsupervised learning method. The right
parts of (a) and (b) are the results of supervised learning methods trained on different datasets. Red boxes mark some errors.
Gaussian AtomSegNet SFIN

HINT SCGN (Ours)

GT

Input

Gaussian

UDVD AtomSegNet SFIN

HINT SCGN (Ours)

NUC
(Ours)

TEMSFIN
Dataset ImageNet

Input

Figure 6. Localization results on different datasets. Training
datasets correspond to the testing datasets.

Figure 7. Localization results on real data. Supervised learning
methods are trained on our NUC dataset.
Table 2. Localization results (IoU metrics) of different methods
on different datasets. Best and second best values are bold and
underlined, respectively.

atoms, and adhesion of multiple atoms. Our SCGN has no
such errors when denoising both disordered (Figure 5(a))
and ordered (Figure 5(b)) atomic arrangements, which indicates that our method facilitates the accurate observation of
the nucleation process.

Method
TEMImageNet [25] SFIN Dataset [22] NUC (Ours)
Gaussian
0.1416
0.0736
0.0940
AtomSegNet [25] [Sci. Rep.’22]
0.5636
0.4507
0.6393
SFIN [22] [CVPR’25]
0.7429
0.5694
0.7124
HINT [18] [ICCV’25]
0.6360
0.4924
0.6494
SCGN (Ours)
0.7444
0.6083
0.7317

4.3. Application on Atomic Localization

Table 3. Ablation study on our Spatial Deviation-Guided Weighting (SDGW) and Frequency Band-Guided Weighting (FBGW).
“PE” means position embedding in FBGW. “CA” means using
channel attention [48] instead of FBGW. Models are tested on our
NUC dataset.

After obtaining the denoising results, the position of each
atom can be easily located. It plays a key role in the automated analysis of the structural properties of materials
[25, 53]. We follow AtomSegNet [25] and SFIN [22] to
compare the atomic localization results of different methods, and use Intersection over Union (IoU) metric for quantitative evaluation.
Figures 6 and 7 show the localization results on three
synthetic datasets and real data, respectively. It can be observed that the results of Gaussian filtering, UDVD [4],
AtomSegNet [25], SFIN [22], and HINT [18] contain false
detections and missed detections. The reason is that the signal and noise were not well distinguished in the denoising
stage. Our SCGN distinguishes signal and noise via statistical characteristic-guided weighting and achieves a better
atomic localization performance. Table 2 also shows that
our SCGN outperforms other methods on the three datasets.

4.4. Discussion
We discuss the effectiveness of our spatial deviation-guided
weighting, our frequency band-guided weighting, and our
NUC dataset in order.

Method
SCGN-V1
SCGN-V2
SCGN-V3
SCGN-V4
SCGN-V5
SCGN (Ours)

SDGW
%
%
!
!
!
!

FBGW
%
!
%
CA
!
!

PE
%
!
%
%
%
!

PSNR ↑
25.74
26.23
26.19
26.24
26.48
26.55

SSIM ↑
0.9672
0.9699
0.9681
0.9689
0.9710
0.9717

Effect of spatial deviation-guided weighting. Our spatial deviation-guided weighting generates weights for each
spatial position based on local standard deviation. It can
dynamically adjust the contribution of different convolution operations to different positions. Figure 8 visualizes
the input features, standard deviation maps, weight maps,
and output features. The weights in the same channel vary
across different spatial positions, indicating that the weighting operation is pixel-wise. Compared with the input feature map, which is almost entirely composed of noise, the
feature map obtained through dynamically weighted convo-

Channel 5

Input

Channel 4

。。。

Deviation

Channel 3

。。。

Weight

Channel 2

。。。

Output

Channel 1

。。。

Figure 8. Visualization of our spatial deviation-guided weighting. By generating weights (W d in Figure 2(a)) for each spatial
position based on local standard deviation, our spatial deviationguided weighting can dynamically adjust the contribution of different convolution operations to different positions, thereby restoring atomic structures in complex noises.

lution operations contains more distinct structural information. Results in Table 3 show that our spatial deviationguided weighting improves PSNR by 0.32 dB (SCGNV2→SCGN) to 0.45 dB (SCGN-V1→SCGN-V3).
Effect of frequency band-guided weighting. Our frequency band-guided weighting enhances signals and suppresses noise by accounting for differences in frequency
band content and position. Figure 9 shows examples of
weighting applied to three different frequency bands. First,
the feature map is decoupled into multiple frequency bands
in the frequency domain. For noise bands irrelevant to the
signal, the weights learned by the network are close to 0,
and these bands are suppressed. For noisy signal bands
that are related to the signal but have unclear structures,
the learned weights are close to 1, so these bands are retained. For signal bands that are related to the signal and
have clear structures, the learned weights are close to 2, and
these bands are enhanced. After weighting, the signal is
enhanced and the noise is reduced.
Unlike channel attention [48], which weights different
feature channels in the spatial domain, our frequency bandguided weighting operates in the latent space of the frequency domain. This makes it easier to distinguish periodic
signals of atomic arrangements from spatially independent
noise by leveraging the frequency band distribution characteristics of signals and noise. The comparison results in
Table 3 show that using frequency band-guided dynamic
weighting can improve PSNR by 0.36 dB (SCGN-V3 →
SCGN), outperforming channel attention (SCGN-V4). Furthermore, using both frequency band content and position
information (SCGN) yields better results than using only
content information (SCGN-V5). This indicates that the position embedding is necessary.

Input
(Learned Weight)

Noise Band
(0.0516)

Noisy Signal Band
(1.3327)

Signal Band
(1.9667)

Figure 9. Visualization of our frequency band-guided weighting.
Three representative frequency bands from the third frequency
band-guided weighting module are converted to the spatial domain
and visualized. It shows that our frequency band-guided weighting can highlight signals and suppress noise by giving different
weights (W b in Figure 2(b)) to them.
Table 4. Comparison of different datasets.
Clean Image Generation Noise Generation
NonDisordered HRTEM Column
Overlapping Arrangement Calibration Noise
TEMImageNet [25]
!
%
%
%
SFIN Dataset [22]
%
!
%
%
NUC (Ours)
!
!
!
!
Dataset

Effect of our dataset. Table 4 compares our NUC
dataset with existing atomic-level transmission electron
microscopy datasets, i.e., TEMImageNet [25] and SFIN
Dataset [22]. Our NUC dataset is more suitable for observing nucleation in both clean image generation and noise
generation. It has non-overlapping and disordered atomic
arrangements, and uses HRTEM noise calibration considering column noise. Figure 5 shows that using our dataset
can denoise real nucleation images, which cannot be easily
achieved using other datasets.

5. Conclusion
In this paper, inspired by the Yau-Yau filter, we propose statistical characteristic-guided denoising for HRTEM images
to enable clear observation of the nucleation process. First,
our spatial deviation-guided weighting module dynamically
adjusts convolution operations based on the standard deviation of local features, allowing it to adapt to signal and noise
conditions at different positions. Second, our frequency
band-guided weighting module distinguishes signals from
noise in the frequency domain based on the position and
content of frequency bands, which can enhance signals and
suppress noise. Finally, we establish the NUC dataset tailored to the nucleation process, which includes more realistic disordered atomic arrangements and HRTEM image
noise. Our method achieves high-precision atomic image
denoising on three synthetic datasets and real data, facilitating the accurate localization of atomic positions. In the
future, to design a more general filter for various noises in
different kinds of images, it is worth investigating more statistical characteristics to guide weighting, such as the median and higher-order moments of local image regions.

Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (62331006), and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities.

References
[1] Robert Bridson. Fast poisson disk sampling in arbitrary dimensions. In Proceedings of the Special Interest Group on
Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques, pages 22–
es, 2007. 5
[2] Linwei Chen, Lin Gu, Dezhi Zheng, and Ying Fu.
Frequency-adaptive dilated convolution for semantic segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 3414–3425,
2024. 3
[3] Linwei Chen, Lin Gu, Liang Li, Chenggang Yan, and Ying
Fu. Frequency dynamic convolution for dense image prediction. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 30178–30188, 2025.
3
[4] Peter A Crozier, Matan Leibovich, Piyush Haluai, Mai Tan,
Andrew M Thomas, Joshua Vincent, Sreyas Mohan, Adria
Marcos Morales, Shreyas A Kulkarni, David S Matteson,
et al. Visualizing nanoparticle surface dynamics and instabilities enabled by deep denoising. Science, 387(6737):949–
954, 2025. 1, 2, 3, 6, 7
[5] Yuning Cui, Wenqi Ren, Xiaochun Cao, and Alois Knoll.
Image restoration via frequency selection. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 46(2):
1093–1108, 2024. 3
[6] Jiarui Fu, Takayuki Nakamuro, and Eiichi Nakamura. Rapid,
low-temperature nanodiamond formation by electron-beam
activation of adamantane c–h bonds. Science, 389(6764):
1024–1030, 2025. 1, 3
[7] Ying Fu and Hesong Li. Fcdfusion: A fast, low color deviation method for fusing visible and infrared image pairs.
Computational Visual Media, 11(1):195–211, 2025. 3
[8] Brent Fultz and James Howe. Diffraction Contrast in TEM
Images, pages 349–427. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013.
1
[9] Zijian Gao, Kele Xu, Xingxing Zhang, Huiping Zhuang,
Tianjiao Wan, Bo Ding, Xinjun Mao, and Wang Huaimin.
Rethinking obscured sub-optimality in analytic learning for
exemplar-free class-incremental learning. IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology, 36(10):
1123–1136, 2025. 2
[10] Yunpeng Gong, Liqing Huang, and Lifei Chen. Person reidentification method based on color attack and joint defence. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition, pages 4313–4322, 2022.
[11] Yunpeng Gong, Zhun Zhong, Yansong Qu, Zhiming Luo,
Rongrong Ji, and Min Jiang. Cross-modality perturbation
synergy attack for person re-identification. In Proceedings of
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages
23352–23377, 2024.
[12] Yunpeng Gong, Yongjie Hou, Jiangming Shi, KL DIEP, and
Min Jiang. A theory-inspired framework for few-shot cross-

modal sketch person re-identification. In Proceedings of the
AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2026.
[13] Xiaojiao Guo, Xuhang Chen, Shuqiang Wang, and Chi-Man
Pun. Underwater image restoration through a prior guided
hybrid sense approach and extensive benchmark analysis.
IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology, 35(5):4784–4800, 2025.
[14] Chunming He, Kai Li, Yachao Zhang, Ziyun Yang, Longxiang Tang, Yulun Zhang, Linghe Kong, and Sina Farsiu. Segment concealed object with incomplete supervision. IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence,
47(9):7832–7851, 2025.
[15] Chunming He, Fengyang Xiao, Rihan Zhang, Chengyu
Fang, Deng-Ping Fan, and Sina Farsiu. Reversible unfolding network for concealed visual perception with generative
refinement. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.15027, 2025. 2
[16] Sungho Jeon, Taeyeong Heo, Sang-Yeon Hwang, Jim Ciston,
Karen C Bustillo, Bryan W Reed, Jimin Ham, Sungsu Kang,
Sungin Kim, Joowon Lim, et al. Reversible disorder-order
transitions in atomic crystal nucleation. Science, 371(6528):
498–503, 2021. 1, 3
[17] Abid Khan, Chia-Hao Lee, Pinshane Y Huang, and Bryan K
Clark. Leveraging generative adversarial networks to create
realistic scanning transmission electron microscopy images.
npj Computational Materials, 9(1):85, 2023. 3
[18] Dongjin Kim, Jaekyun Ko, Muhammad Kashif Ali, and
Tae Hyun Kim. Idf: Iterative dynamic filtering networks for
generalizable image denoising. In Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Computer Vision, pages 12180–
12190, 2025. 6, 7
[19] Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for
stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980,
2014. 6
[20] Chia-Hao Lee, Abid Khan, Di Luo, Tatiane P Santos,
Chuqiao Shi, Blanka E Janicek, Sangmin Kang, Wenjuan Zhu, Nahil A Sobh, André Schleife, et al. Deep
learning enabled strain mapping of single-atom defects in
two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides with subpicometer precision. Nano Letters, 20(5):3369–3377, 2020.
2
[21] Hongliang Li, Feng Dai, Qiang Zhao, Yike Ma, Juan Cao,
and Yongdong Zhang. Non-uniform compressive sensing
imaging based on image saliency. Chinese Journal of Electronics, 32(1):159–165, 2023. 2
[22] Hesong Li, Ziqi Wu, Ruiwen Shao, Tao Zhang, and Ying
Fu. Noise calibration and spatial-frequency interactive network for stem image enhancement. In Proceedings of the
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference, pages 21287–21296, 2025. 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7,
8
[23] Miaoyu Li, Ying Fu, Tao Zhang, Ji Liu, Dejing Dou, Chenggang Yan, and Yulun Zhang. Latent diffusion enhanced rectangle transformer for hyperspectral image restoration. IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence,
47(1):549–564, 2024. 2
[24] Mingxian Li, Hao Sun, Yingtie Lei, Xiaofeng Zhang, Yihang
Dong, Yilin Zhou, Zimeng Li, and Xuhang Chen. Highfidelity document stain removal via a large-scale real-world

dataset and a memory-augmented transformer. In Proceedings of the IEEE Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision, pages 7614–7624, 2024. 2
[25] Ruoqian Lin, Rui Zhang, Chunyang Wang, Xiao-Qing Yang,
and Huolin L Xin. Temimagenet training library and atomsegnet deep-learning models for high-precision atom segmentation, localization, denoising, and deblurring of atomicresolution images. Scientific Reports, 11(1):5386, 2021. 1,
2, 3, 6, 7, 8
[26] Jacob Madsen and Toma Susi. The abtem code: transmission
electron microscopy from first principles. Open Research
Europe, 1:24, 2021. 2
[27] Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer,
and Soumith Chintala. Pytorch: An imperative style,
high-performance deep learning library. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1912.01703, 2019. 4, 5, 6
[28] S.J. Pennycook and D.E. Jesson. High-resolution z-contrast
imaging of crystals. Ultramicroscopy, 37(1):14–38, 1991. 2
[29] SJ Pennycook, DE Jesson, MF Chisholm, ND Browning, AJ
McGibbon, and MM McGibbon. Z-contrast imaging in the
scanning transmission electron microscope. Microscopy and
Microanalysis, 1(6):231–251, 2003. 2
[30] Ken Perlin. An image synthesizer. In Proceedings of Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques,
pages 287–296, 1985. 5
[31] Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net:
Convolutional networks for biomedical image segmentation.
In Proceedings of Medical image computing and computerassisted intervention, pages 234–241, 2015. 2
[32] Yusuke Seto and Masahiro Ohtsuka. Recipro: free and opensource multipurpose crystallographic software integrating
a crystal model database and viewer, diffraction and microscopy simulators, and diffraction data analysis tools. Applied Crystallography, 55(2):397–410, 2022. 2
[33] Thermo Fisher Scientific. Velox. https : / / www .
thermofisher.com, 2024. Accessed: 2024-05-21. 5
[34] Ye Tian, Ying Fu, and Jun Zhang. Transformer-based undersampled single-pixel imaging. Chinese Journal of Electronics, 32(5):1151–1159, 2023. 2
[35] Carlo Tomasi and Roberto Manduchi. Bilateral filtering for
gray and color images. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, pages 839–846,
1998. 2
[36] Chunyang Wang, Xuelong Wang, Rui Zhang, Tianjiao Lei,
Kim Kisslinger, and Huolin L. Xin. Resolving complex intralayer transition motifs in high-ni-content layered cathode
materials for lithium-ion batteries. Nature Materials, 22(2):
235–241, 2023. 2
[37] Chunyang Wang, Yaqi Jing, Dong Zhu, and Huolin L. Xin.
Atomic origin of chemomechanical failure of layered cathodes in all-solid-state batteries. Journal of the American
Chemical Society, 146(26):17712–17718, 2024. 2
[38] Jianan Wang, Hesong Li, Xiaoyong Wang, and Ying Fu. 3db2u: Self-supervised fluorescent image sequences denoising.
In Artificial Intelligence, pages 130–142, 2024. 2
[39] Zhou Wang, Alan C Bovik, Hamid R Sheikh, and Eero P Simoncelli. Image quality assessment: from error visibility to
structural similarity. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, 13(4):600–612, 2004. 6

[40] Kaixuan Wei, Ying Fu, Jiaolong Yang, and Hua Huang. A
physics-based noise formation model for extreme low-light
raw denoising. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 2758–
2767, 2020. 3
[41] Kaixuan Wei, Ying Fu, Yinqiang Zheng, and Jiaolong Yang.
Physics-based noise modeling for extreme low-light photography. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence, 44(11):8520–8537, 2021. 3
[42] Norbert Wiener. Extrapolation, interpolation, and smoothing of stationary time series: with engineering applications.
The MIT press, 1949. 2
[43] LI Yanshan, CHEN Shifu, LUO Wenhan, ZHOU Li, and
XIE Weixin. Hyperspectral image super-resolution based on
spatial-spectral feature extraction network. Chinese Journal
of Electronics, 32(3):415–428, 2023. 2
[44] Stephen S-T Yau, Xiuqiong Chen, Xiaopei Jiao, Jiayi Kang,
Zeju Sun, and Yangtianze Tao. Yau-yau algorithm. In Principles of Nonlinear Filtering Theory, pages 263–296. Springer,
2024. 1, 3
[45] Rui Zhang, Chunyang Wang, Peichao Zou, Ruoqian Lin, Lu
Ma, Tianyi Li, In-hui Hwang, Wenqian Xu, Chengjun Sun,
Steve Trask, and Huolin L. Xin. Long-life lithium-ion batteries realized by low-ni, co-free cathode chemistry. Nature
Energy, 8(7):695–702, 2023. 2
[46] Tao Zhang, Ying Fu, and Jun Zhang. Guided hyperspectral
image denoising with realistic data. International Journal of
Computer Vision, 130(11):2885–2901, 2022. 2
[47] Tao Zhang, Ying Fu, Jun Zhang, and Chenggang Yan. Deep
guided attention network for joint denoising and demosaicing in real image. Chinese Journal of Electronics, 33(1):
303–312, 2024. 2
[48] Yulun Zhang, Kunpeng Li, Kai Li, Lichen Wang, Bineng
Zhong, and Yun Fu. Image super-resolution using very deep
residual channel attention networks. In Proceedings of the
European Conference on Computer Vision, pages 286–301,
2018. 5, 7, 8
[49] Yingkai Zhang, Zeqiang Lai, Tao Zhang, Ying Fu, and
Chenghu Zhou. Unaligned rgb guided hyperspectral image
super-resolution with spatial-spectral concordance. International Journal of Computer Vision, 133(9):6590–6610, 2025.
2
[50] Yingkai Zhang, Tao Zhang, Jing Nie, and Ying Fu. Real
noise decoupling for hyperspectral image denoising. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2511.17196, 2025.
[51] Yingkai Zhang, Shuang Chen, Ye Tian, Yunyi Gao, Jianyong Jiang, and Ying Fu. Supervise-assisted multi-modality
fusion diffusion model for pet restoration. Tsinghua Science
and Technology, 2026.
[52] Tianyu Zhu, Hesong Li, and Ying Fu. Trim-sod: A multimodal, multi-task, and multi-scale spacecraft optical dataset.
Space: Science & Technology, 5:0299, 2025. 2
[53] Maxim Ziatdinov, Ayana Ghosh, Chun Yin Wong, and
Sergei V Kalinin. Atomai framework for deep learning analysis of image and spectroscopy data in electron and scanning probe microscopy. Nature Machine Intelligence, 4(12):
1101–1112, 2022. 7

