IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 64, 2026

5000417

Edge-Semantic Synergy Network With Edge-Aware
Attention for Infrared Small Target Detection
Maoyong Li , Yingying Gao, Xuedong Guo , Zhixiang Chen , Member, IEEE, Lei Deng , Mingli Dong ,
and Lianqing Zhu

Abstract—Infrared small target detection (IRSTD) plays a
crucial role in applications such as autonomous driving, environmental monitoring, and industrial inspection. However, the
small size of targets, their blurred edges, and complex backgrounds often result in significant limitations of existing methods
in terms of feature synergy and edge information utilization.
To address these challenges, this article proposes an edgesemantic synergy network with edge-aware attention (ESSNet)
for IRSTD. ESSNet substantially enhances detection performance
by explicitly reinforcing edge information and optimizing multilevel feature interactions. Specifically, the edge-semantic synergy
module (ESSM) leverages edge details at the lowest level and
semantic information at the highest level to achieve long-range
level modulation, thereby enhancing the synergy between edges
and semantics. Additionally, ESSM integrates a multiscale edgeaware attention (MSEA), which embeds edge features into the
attention mechanism through explicit edge supervision, effectively
improving the accuracy of boundary detection. Furthermore, the
multilevel feature fusion (MLFF) module is introduced to mitigate
semantic loss during the decoding process via a layer-wise guidance mechanism, preserving the structural integrity of detected
targets. Experiments conducted on the SIRST, NUDT-SIRST,
and IRSTD-1K datasets demonstrate that ESSNet significantly
outperforms existing methods on key metrics, achieving state-ofthe-art (SOTA) performance.
Index Terms—Attention mechanism, edge aware, feature
fusion, infrared small target detection (IRSTD), semantic
segmentation.

I. I NTRODUCTION

I

NFRARED small target detection (IRSTD) is widely
applied in fields such as autonomous driving, environmental monitoring, and industrial inspection [1]. However, due to
low resolution caused by long-distance imaging and inherent
limitations of the imaging mechanism, infrared small targets
typically exhibit no color information, small size, diverse
Received 9 May 2025; revised 10 October 2025 and 19 November
2025; accepted 15 December 2025. Date of publication 24 December 2025;
date of current version 7 January 2026. This work was supported in part
by the Research Project of Beijing Municipal Natural Science Foundation
under Grant BJXZ2021-012-00046. (Corresponding authors: Lei Deng; Mingli Dong; Lianqing Zhu.)
Maoyong Li, Yingying Gao, Xuedong Guo, Lei Deng, Mingli Dong,
and Lianqing Zhu are with the Key Laboratory for Optoelectronic Measurement Technology and Instrument, Ministry of Education, and Beijing
Laboratory of Optical Fiber Sensing and System, Beijing Information
Science and Technology University, Beijing 100192, China, and also
with Guangzhou Nansha Intelligent Photonic Sensing Research Institute,
Guangzhou, Guangdong 511462, China (e-mail: limaoyong@bistu.edu.cn;
gaoyingying@bistu.edu.cn; guoxuedong@bistu.edu.cn; dally211@163.com;
dongml@bistu.edu.cn; lqzhu bistu@sina.com).
Zhixiang Chen is with the Department of Computer Science, The University
of Sheffield, S1 4DP Sheffield, U.K. (e-mail: zhixiang.chen@sheffield.ac.uk).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TGRS.2025.3648149

shapes, and blurred edges, as shown in Fig. 1(a), posing
significant detection challenges [2]. Thus, effectively utilizing
the limited feature information of small targets to achieve
precise detection remains a critical issue to be addressed [3].
Early studies primarily relied on model-driven methods,
such as filtering [4], [5], local contrast [6], [7], [8], [9], [10],
[11], and optimization-based approaches [12], [13], [14], [15],
[16], which extract target features using explicit physical models and prior knowledge. A core limitation of these methods is
their reliance on strong, handcrafted prior assumptions about
target and background characteristics, such as high contrast,
predictable shapes, or statistically simple backgrounds [17].
When these assumptions are violated in challenging real-world
scenarios (e.g., complex backgrounds with low contrast), their
performance degrades significantly, often resulting in higher
miss and false detection rates [18].
With the rapid advancement of deep learning, the ability to
learn and extract deep latent information from large datasets
has markedly improved IRSTD performance [19], [20], [21],
[22], [23], [24]. Nevertheless, we observe that in complex,
high-intensity backgrounds, where target–background contrast
is low, issues such as missed detections or incomplete predictions of target structure and edges frequently arise. We attribute
these phenomena to two primary causes.
1) Insufficient Cross-Level Features Synergy: Low-level
features contain rich details (e.g., target edges) but
lack semantic representation, while high-level features
offer strong semantic information yet lose details due
to repeated downsampling [17]. Existing methods often
design enhancement blocks in the encoder and decoder
to enhance single-level features [25], [26], [27] or
exploit contextual cues from adjacent levels [28], [29],
[30], as shown in Fig. 1(b) and (c). Although these
approaches achieve satisfactory results, they overlook
cues from long-range levels, leading to insufficient
cross-level feature synergy. This limitation restricts
global context modeling capabilities, resulting in varying
degrees of missed and false detections.
2) Inadequate Edge Information Utilization: Current edgeaware methods typically extract coarse edge maps from
raw images, feed them into independent edge branches,
and design fusion strategies to enhance target branch
edge features [31], [32], [33], [34], [35]. Because the
target branch learns high-level semantic representations
at the cost of spatial precision, while the edge branch
retains precise but semantically poor details, a semantic

1558-0644 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Fudan UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 12,2026 at 12:18:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5000417

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 64, 2026

Fig. 1. Framework and visualization results of a representative IRSTD method. (a) Input Image. (b) Single-level feature enhancement method (ISTDU-Net
[25]). (c) Adjacent-level feature enhancement method (HCFNet [28]). (d) Edge branch method (ISNet [36]). (e) Ours. (f) GT. Compared to other methods, our
ESSNet synergizes features at long-range levels, effectively and precisely identifying targets through enhancement blocks with edge-aware attention, which
fully leverages edge information. Targets are magnified and placed in the image corners, with red, yellow, and blue representing correct detections, false
alarms, and missed detections, respectively.

disparity arises between them. This disparity makes
maintaining consistency during fusion challenging and
can lead to suboptimal results, as shown in Fig. 1(d).
Motivated by these observations, we propose a novel and
efficient edge-semantic synergy network with edge-aware
attention (ESSNet) to address these challenges. As illustrated
in Fig. 1(e), ESSNet explicitly enhances edge information
and optimizes multilevel feature interactions, significantly
improving IRSTD performance. First, to enable deep interaction and fusion of long-range features in the backbone
network, we introduce the edge-semantic synergy module
(ESSM). ESSM leverages low-level features rich in detail
and high-level features with semantic content, modulating
current features through long-range level information. This
enhances the synergy between edge details and semantic
information, effectively bridging the semantic gap. Second,
treating attention mechanisms and edge perception as separate processes often neglects the limited edge features of
small targets. To address this, we propose the multiscale
edge-aware attention (MSEA). MSEA embeds edge features
into the attention mechanism via explicit edge supervision,
increasing focus on edge regions and enabling precise differentiation of blurred target edges from complex backgrounds.
Finally, during decoding, semantic information degrades in
shallower layers, while low-level details are enriched. If not
effectively fused to address semantic disparities between the
target and background, this may lead to the loss of target
structures or incorrect foreground predictions. To mitigate this,
we introduce the multilevel feature fusion (MLFF) module,

which employs a multilevel guidance mechanism to facilitate layer-wise feature interactions. MLFF effectively captures
long-range dependencies among pixel-level objects, preserving contextual consistency and enhancing the integrity and
accuracy of predictions. To validate ESSNet’s effectiveness,
we conducted comprehensive experiments on the SIRST,
NUDT-SIRST, and IRSTD-1K datasets. Results demonstrate
that ESSNet outperforms existing IRSTD methods across key
metrics, achieving state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance.
In summary, the main contributions of this work are as
follows.
1) We investigate the synergy between edge and semantic
information in IRSTD and propose ESSNet, establishing
an edge-semantic synergistic paradigm that effectively
mitigates semantic gap and edge blurring issues.
2) We introduce MSEA and ESSM. MSEA enhances focus
on edge features, while ESSM performs long-range
cross-layer modulation to fuse multilevel edge-semantic
features, improving detail capture and target localization.
3) We present MLFF, which promotes decoder feature
interactions through a layer-wise guidance mechanism, reducing information loss and boosting prediction
accuracy.
II. R ELATED W ORK
A. Model-Driven IRSTD Methods
Model-driven IRSTD methods typically rely on image
processing techniques or handcrafted features, encompassing

Authorized licensed use limited to: Fudan UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 12,2026 at 12:18:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LI et al.: EDGE-SEMANTIC SYNERGY NETWORK WITH EDGE-AWARE ATTENTION FOR IRSTD

filter-based, local contrast-based, and optimization-based
approaches.
Filter-based methods employ spatial or frequency-domain
filters to suppress background noise or clutter. Representative
algorithms include the Top-Hat [4] and Max-Median [5].
These algorithms are straightforward and easy to implement
but are generally effective only in simple background scenarios. Local contrast-based methods assume a pronounced
brightness disparity between small targets and their backgrounds, leveraging local contrast to distinguish targets
effectively. These methods detect targets by computing the
contrast within local regions and comparing it to background
intensity. Chen et al. [6] enhanced the classic local contrast measure (LCM) by substituting the maximum grayscale
value with the mean, proposing the improved LCM (ILCM)
[8], which mitigates interference from high-intensity noise.
Subsequent developments, such as MPCM [7], RLCM [9],
HB-MLCM [10], and SRDLCM [11], further refine contrast
computation precision and adaptability, enhancing detection
robustness in complex scenes. While these methods perform
adequately in simple scenarios, their effectiveness diminishes
in complex backgrounds or with low-contrast targets, where
subtle grayscale differences impair the differentiation of target
edges from clutter noise. Optimization-based methods exploit
the high correlation of infrared image backgrounds, treating
targets as perturbations that disrupt this correlation. Techniques like IPI [37], WIPI [38], NIPPS [13], and NRAM [39]
separate targets from backgrounds through low-rank matrix
recovery. However, these approaches struggle with strong edge
interference, background estimation inaccuracies, and limited
adaptability to complex scenes.
Model-driven methods offer high interpretability and modest
data requirements but rely heavily on manually engineered features and prior assumptions. Consequently, their robustness is
limited in complex backgrounds, rendering them less effective
across diverse scenarios.
B. Data-Driven IRSTD Methods
With the advent of deep learning, data-driven methods
have achieved significant progress in IRSTD tasks. These
approaches automatically learn complex features from large
datasets, eliminating the need for manual feature design.
Several bounding box-based methods have emerged, predicting
rectangular regions to locate and identify targets. For instance,
Ding et al. [40] proposed an SSD-based approach comprising single-frame detection and multiframe filtering stages,
introducing an adaptive pipeline filter based on temporal
correlation and motion information to refine detection results.
Li and Shen [41] enhanced YOLOv5 by incorporating superresolution processing and data augmentation techniques to
better address the inherent challenges of IRSTD. Currently,
segmentation-based methods are widely adopted in IRSTD
due to their ability to precisely capture the boundaries and
shape features of infrared small targets. To preserve and
emphasize small targets in high-level features, Dai et al. [42]
introduced an asymmetric contextual modulation module to
facilitate feature fusion. Wu et al. [43] embedded a smallscale U-Net within a U-Net backbone to mitigate target loss

5000417

caused by increased network depth. Addressing the potential
loss of deep-layer targets due to repeated downsampling,
Li et al. [44] designed a dense nested interactive module to enable progressive interaction between high- and
low-level features. Similarly, Yuan et al. [45] developed a
spatial–channel cross transformer block between the encoder
and decoder to enhance semantic interactions across these
stages.
C. Edge Perception in IRSTD
Although the aforementioned data-driven methods have
achieved notable success, the blurred edges and low contrast
of small targets often result in suboptimal edge quality in final
predictions. To enhance edge detection capabilities for infrared
small targets, recent approaches have focused on leveraging
edge features to preserve more prominent edge details.
Zhang et al. [36] pioneered edge perception in IRSTD
by introducing a Sobel operator to extract edges from input
images, forming an edge branch. This branch reconstructs
target edges using an edge block inspired by Taylor finite
difference (TFD), subsequently integrating these edge features
with the backbone branch to enhance the clarity of detected
target details. Tong et al. [33] extended this concept by adding
an internal feature branch employing a mean filter and distance
transform function to produce an internal map. Both branches
are processed through an efficient edge and internal feature
aggregation module (EIFAM) to refine edge details and internal features. Li et al. [34] designed a sophisticated edge prior
using a boundary boosting algorithm combined with a Sobel
operator for an edge extraction branch, while introducing a
multiscale feature progressive fusion (MFPF) encoder in the
target detection branch. Simple aggregation and separation
operations enable information fusion and interaction between
the two branches. Lin et al. [31] jointly trained an image
branch with large-kernel convolutions and an edge branch
generating edge maps from input images, fusing them via
a shape-reconstructible decoder. Yao et al. [46] employed a
dual-stream framework to learn edge details and target regions,
enhancing target representation with a cross-dimensional interactive aggregation attention module (CIAAM) that adaptively
adjusts fusion weights between low- and high-level features.
These methods typically extract coarse edge maps from raw
images, train them in an edge branch, and integrate them with
the target detection branch through fusion strategies. However,
this approach often captures pseudo-edges from backgrounds,
noise, or irrelevant objects. Moreover, semantic disparities
between the two branches hinder consistent fusion. This conflict arises because the target branch learns abstract high-level
semantic representations, while the edge branch focuses on
precise, low-level spatial details, limiting the effectiveness of
edge features without a common semantic basis. In contrast,
our approach embeds edge information directly into spatial
attention maps, naturally integrating edge and infrared small
target features. This avoids the fragmentation issues of dualbranch designs, enabling more accurate localization of small
target boundaries in complex infrared scenes and improving
detection precision.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Fudan UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 12,2026 at 12:18:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5000417

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 64, 2026

Fig. 2. Architecture of the proposed ESSNet. ESSNet features a U-shaped structure with three specialized modules: the ESSM, MSEA, and MLFF modules.
MSEA enhances edge details, which are embedded within ESSM for edge-semantic synergy, and MLFF fuses these features in the decoder to generate the
final prediction map via upsampling.

Fig. 3. Illustration of the MSEA. MSEA first extracts rich multiscale contextual information using densely connected dilated convolutions with varying scales
pred
and then dynamically integrates the learned edge information at
into the spatial attention map asa
t via the EFIA, achieving precise enhancement of edge
features.

III. M ETHODOLOGY
A. Overall Architecture
The overall network architecture is illustrated in Fig. 2. It
integrates three key modules: the ESSM, the MSEA, and the
MLFF module. The encoder, built on ResNet [47], consists of
five stages, denoted as Rt (t = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5), generating features
Et ∈ Rct ×ht ×wt , where ct ∈ {16, 16, 32, 48, 64}, ht = H/2t−1 , and
wt = W/2t−1 . These features are channel-adjusted using cont −1
t −1
volution to produce Ft ∈ R32×H/(2 )×W/(2 ) , ensuring uniform
channel dimensions across stages. The MSEA enhances edge
details in the lowest level features F1 ∈ R32×H×W and highest

level features F5 ∈ R32×H/16×W/16 , yielding the synergy feature
O1 and O5 , both retaining input dimensions. Intermediate
levels features Ft (t = 2, 3, 4) are processed by ESSM. Notably,
to ensure consistent edge-aware processing at every stage,
each ESSM module internally incorporates an MSEA as a
key component of its detail refinement block (DRB). ESSM
takes {F1 , Ft , and F5 } as inputs and employs the DRB for
edge refinement, the semantic-guided localization (SGL) for
semantic reshaping, and the synergistic aggregation block
(SAB) for dynamic importance modeling, yielding the synergy
feature O2 –O4 . The synergy features Ot (t = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5) from
each layer are progressively fused in the last three stages of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Fudan UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 12,2026 at 12:18:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LI et al.: EDGE-SEMANTIC SYNERGY NETWORK WITH EDGE-AWARE ATTENTION FOR IRSTD

5000417

the decoder through MLFF, generating the output Mt (t =
1, 2, 3, 4). Finally, the final prediction map is obtained through
upsampling. In this article, we introduce deep supervision
during the training phase.
B. Multiscale Edge-Aware Attention
Accurate detection of small infrared targets requires robust
edge feature enhancement to address challenges such as
blurred boundaries. To this end, we propose the MSEA, a
versatile module designed for edge enhancement, as shown in
Fig. 3. MSEA refines high-resolution edge details by directly
processing the lowest level feature F1 or downsampling it to
match the resolution of intermediate-level features (F2 –F4 ),
providing clear boundary information for these levels. It
is worth emphasizing that MSEA also directly processes
the highest level feature F5 , refining coarse boundary cues
within its semantically rich yet spatially coarse feature map.
This adaptive edge enhancement strategy is pivotal for small
infrared target detection, ensuring comprehensive boundary
optimization across fine-grained details and global semantics.
MSEA comprises two steps: multiscale context extraction and
edge embedding.
1) Multiscale Context Extraction: Infrared small targets
exhibit diverse sizes and variations, making it challenging for
networks to capture clear edge information. This necessitates
advanced feature extraction methods to enhance the network’s
ability to capture contextual features across different scales. In
this step, rich multiscale contextual information is extracted
using a series of densely connected 3 × 3 dilated convolutions
[48], each with a dilation rate defined as 2N + 1, where N
represents the index corresponding to the number of dilated
convolutions. This progressively expanding receptive field
captures features ranging from local edges to global structures,
while being gradual enough to avoid overly sparse sampling
of the features, which is crucial for preserving the fine-grained
details of small targets. The justification for our choice of dilation rates is elaborated in the ablation study in Section IV-C.
The dense connections, in turn, enhance contextual integrity
and diversity through the fusion of cross-layer features. This
process generates a robust multiscale contextual feature ftmsce ,
providing a solid foundation for subsequent processing.
2) Edge Embedding: We propose an edge-focused integration attention (EFIA) that effectively incorporates dynamically
focused edge information into a spatial attention map through
explicit edge supervision, guiding the network to learn clear
and accurate target boundary features. Specifically, as shown in
Fig. 3, EFIA first performs feature weighting and optimization
via channel attention (CA)

(1)
ftmsce
ftca = CA ftmsce
where
denotes the channel-wise multiplication and CA(·)
represents the CA [49], which learns the importance of each
feature channel and assigns them different weights.
The output is then split into two branches, with the red
feature stream designated as the edge branch. By applying a
target edge loss, this branch supervises the learning of target
pred
∈
edge features, generating the edge prediction map at

Fig. 4. Visualization of intermediate feature maps in EFIA. The visualization
demonstrates that EFIA significantly enhances focus on edge features by
sig
edge
embedding at into asa
. The resulting ftefia exhibits improved
t to generate at
boundary precision and discriminability.
t−1

t−1

R1×H/(2 )×W/(2 ) . The ground truth (GT) for the target edges
is extracted from the target GT using a Sobel filter. The process
of the edge branch is formulated as follows:

pred
(2)
at = Conv3×3 Conv1×1 ftca .
The yellow feature stream serves as the spatial attention
branch, generating the spatial attention map asa
t . The edge
pred
prediction map at from the edge branch is processed through
sig
a sigmoid function to produce the edge weight map at .
sig
sa
Subsequently, at and at are fused via element-wise addition,
edge
forming the edge-enhanced attention map at

ca
(3)
asa
t = SA ft


edge
pred
at = Sigmoid at
⊕ asa
(4)
t
where ⊕ denotes element-wise addition and SA(·) represents
the spatial attention [49], which learns the importance of
different spatial locations and assigns them different weights.
edge
The edge-enhanced attention map at is element-wise multiplied with ftca , generating the final edge-focused embedded
feature map ftefia
edge
ftefia = at ⊗ ftca
(5)
where ⊗ is the element-wise multiplication.
Finally, ftefia is processed through two sequential 3 × 3
convolutions for further refinement, followed by a residual
connection with the input features and multiscale contextual
features from three dilated convolutions. This design uses convolutions to stabilize the attention-modulated features, while
the residual connection preserves essential contextual details
and aids gradient flow during training, producing the feature
ftmsea .
To validate the effectiveness of EFIA in focusing on edge
features and embedding them into the attention map, we
visualized its intermediate feature maps, as shown in Fig. 4.
Before ftmsce enters EFIA, attention primarily focuses on the
target’s interior, with insufficient edge focus and notable deviation from the true contour, highlighting unoptimized features’
sig
boundary limitations. Subsequently, embedding at into asa
t
edge
yields at , which sharply focuses on edge cues. The resulting ftefia enhances boundary precision and discriminability.
Visualization confirms EFIA’s efficacy in optimizing attention
via edge embedding, supporting accurate and robust boundary
feature learning.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Fudan UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 12,2026 at 12:18:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5000417

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 64, 2026

Fig. 5. Illustration of the ESSM, which consists of DRB, SGL, and SAB. ESSM enhances the Intermediate levels feature Ft with edge-semantic synergy
using the lowest level feature F1 and the highest level feature F5 . DRB refines the edges of Ft using F1 , SGL guides the semantic localization of Ft using
F5 , and SAB aggregates their outputs to boost target representation.

C. Edge-Semantic Synergy Module
The blurred edges, weak features, and susceptibility to background confusion in infrared small targets make it challenging
to achieve satisfactory results by relying solely on semantic or
edge information. To address these issues, existing methods
often struggle to simultaneously preserve fine edge details
and effectively transmit semantic information. To this end, we
propose the ESSM to facilitate the synergistic modulation of
the Intermediate levels feature Ft by the lowest level edge
feature F1 and the highest level semantic feature F5 . The
detailed structure of ESSM, comprising the DRB, SGL, and
SAB, is illustrated in Fig. 5.
The interaction between these components follows a workflow of parallel processing and synergistic aggregation.
Specifically, the DRB and SGL operate in parallel on Ft : the
DRB leverages F1 to inject fine-grained edge details, while
the SGL utilizes high-level semantics from F5 to guide target
localization. Finally, the outputs of these two branches are
fed into the SAB, which fuses these complementary features
via a cross-attention mechanism to generate a final synergistic
feature map.
1) Detail Refinement Block: In the feature extraction process, downsampling operations often lead to the progressive
loss of detailed feature information. To preserve edge details
and enhance the accuracy of target boundaries, we propose
the DRB, as illustrated in the top-left corner of Fig. 5. DRB
employs a novel MSEA to extract rich edge information from
F1 and refines the edge details of Ft through a three-branch
feature fusion strategy. This approach not only retains useful
features of the current layer but also integrates abundant detail
from lower level features.
Initially, F1 is downsampled from 32 × H × W to 32 ×
H/2t−1 × W/2t−1 , followed by enhancement of edge detail
gate
capture via MSEA. Then, ft
and ftmsea are processed via
a three-branch feature fusion strategy consisting of channel concatenation, element-wise addition, and element-wise

multiplication. Channel concatenation enables joint modeling
by preserving all information from both sources. Element-wise
addition directly strengthens the current features by superimposing edge details, while element-wise multiplication allows
the edge features to act as an attention-like gate that selectively
modulates the current feature map. This three-branch fusion
strategy enables the capture of more comprehensive feature
representations, fully leveraging feature diversity and effectively minimizing information loss. Each branch’s output is
refined through two 3 × 3 convolution layers to integrate edge
information and salient features and then fused with Ft via a
residual connection to produce the final feature. This threebranch fusion approach effectively refines detailed features
while minimizing information loss.
2) SGL Block: As feature extraction deepens, the network
progressively abstracts semantic information with strong class
discrimination and contextual awareness. In complex scenes,
high-level semantics enhance target region responses, effectively distinguishing targets from backgrounds and improving
localization accuracy. To this end, we introduce the SGL block,
as illustrated in the bottom-left corner of Fig. 5. It leverages
the semantic information of F5 to guide Ft via attention
mechanisms across channel and spatial dimensions, preserving
details while enhancing target region focus.
First, we propose dual-feature CA (DFCA), which uses
global average pooling (GAP) [50] to extract global context
from F5 and Ft . These are concatenated and processed through
two fully connected layers to generate a CA map adfca
, sized
t
32 × 1 × 1. This map adjusts Ft at the channel level, producing
ftdfca . Guided by semantic cues, our DFCA exhibits higher
sensitivity to informative channels compared to traditional CA.
Finally, F5 is upsampled via bilinear interpolation to match
the spatial resolution of Ft and ftdfca , which then spatially
modulates them to selectively enhance target-related spatial positions. Features are fused via a residual connection,
sgl
yielding the SGL output ft , which improves localization

Authorized licensed use limited to: Fudan UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 12,2026 at 12:18:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LI et al.: EDGE-SEMANTIC SYNERGY NETWORK WITH EDGE-AWARE ATTENTION FOR IRSTD

5000417

accuracy.
adfca
= FC 2 (FC 1 (Concat (GAP (F5 ) , GAP (Ft ))))
t

(6)

ftdfca = Ft ⊗ adfca
t
sg1
ft = SA (UP (F5 )) ⊗ ftdfca

(7)
+ SA (UP (F5 )) ⊗ Ft + Ft

(8)

where FC 2 (·) and FC 1 (·) are 1 × 1 convolutions with
sigmoid/ReLU activations, respectively;
and ⊗ denote
channel-/pixel-wise multiplication, respectively; SA(·) is spatial attention; and UP is upsampling.
3) Synergistic Aggregation Block: The output of DRB is
rich in edge details, providing high-resolution local features,
while the output of SGL focuses on semantic information,
capturing global context and regional consistency. To synergistically aggregate these two types of information, we propose
the SAB, as illustrated in Fig. 5.
SAB employs the cross-attention mechanism to synergistisgl
cally aggregate the output features ftdrb and ft from DRB and
SGL, achieving a better balance between details and semantics.
Specifically, 1 × 1 convolutions project these features into
query, key, and value representations. Channel-wise spatial
matrix multiplication computes the spatial position similarity
sgl
between ftdrb and ft for each channel, modeling the spatial
dependencies across layers. A learnable parameter γ controls
the weighting between original and fused features. It is initialized to 1 and is learned as a single scalar parameter for
each module instance (i.e., per layer), which ensures effective
information transfer
 sgl 
 drb 
Q = Conv1×1 ft , K = Conv1×1 ft
 sgl 
V = Conv1×1 ft
(9)

(10)
A = Softmax Q ~ KT
sgl

ftessm = γ · (V ~ A) + ft

(11)

where ~ is the matrix multiplication.
Unlike traditional positional self-attention (e.g., generating (H × W) × (H × W) attention map) [51] or channel
self-attention (e.g., generating C × C attention map) [51],
SAB focuses on channel-wise spatial relationships to balance contributions from different feature sources, enabling
synergistic fusion. It computes spatial similarity via matrix
multiplication as (H × W) × (W × H) per channel, producing
a C × H × H attention map—or C × H × W when
H = W. This design avoids explicit reshaping, relying solely
on transpose and matrix multiplication, significantly reducing
computational complexity and memory usage while efficiently
fusing multisource features.
D. MLFF Module
During the decoding process, semantic information tends
to degrade progressively as it propagates from deep to shallow layers, leading to missing target structures or excessive
foreground prediction. To address this, we propose the MLFF
module, as shown in Fig. 6.
MLFF promotes feature hierarchy interaction through a
multilevel guidance mechanism, fusing features of different granularities from the encoder to enhance segmentation

Fig. 6. MLFF module during the decoder stage.

integrity and accuracy. During the decoding process, semantic
information tends to degrade progressively as it propagates
from deep to shallow layers. The MLFF module is not applied
to the deepest stage, where features are semantically similar,
but is instead strategically applied to the last three stages of the
decoder. This is intended to ensure effective semantic guidance
from high-level to low-level features while maintaining computational efficiency. In this configuration, each MLFF takes
the current layer’s synergistic feature Ot , the decoded feature
from the previous level Mt+1 , and all higher level synergistic
features (e.g., O5 , O4 , and O3 ).
Specifically, each higher level synergistic feature (O5 , O4 ,
and O3 ) is first upsampled to match the spatial resolution of
Ot , and then, these features are fused together through pixelwise multiplication. The fused result is subsequently injected
into the residual structure of Ot and Mt+1 via pixel-wise
multiplication, and updated into ftl and ftl+1 using a 3 × 3
convolution. Meanwhile, the fused result is processed by a
separate 3 × 3 convolution to generate fth . Finally, ftl , ftl+1 ,
and fth are concatenated to produce the MLFF output ftmlff

(12)
ftmlff = Concat ftl , fth , ftl+1 .
Through this multilevel semantic feature guidance, MLFF
effectively prevents semantic degradation, ensuring consistent and progressively reinforced semantic information during
decoding. Additionally, the progressive fusion and residual
connection mechanism stabilizes feature propagation, reducing interference from complex backgrounds on segmentation
results.
E. Loss Function and Edge Label Generation
We use a mixed loss function to train our network,
including binary cross-entropy (BCE) loss [52], Soft-IoU loss
[53], and F-measure (F-m) loss [54]. The map-level SoftIoU loss demonstrates superior performance in alleviating
foreground–background imbalance and handling small target
segmentation [42] and has thus been widely adopted in IRSTD
tasks. To compensate for its limitation in fine-grained pixel
supervision, and inspired by the success of mixed loss strategies in salient object detection [55], [56], we incorporate
pixel-level BCE loss to provide refined constraints. Moreover,
to enhance robustness under extreme imbalance scenarios, we

Authorized licensed use limited to: Fudan UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 12,2026 at 12:18:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5000417

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 64, 2026

further introduce a metric-aware F-m loss, which guides the
model toward a better tradeoff between precision and recall
P H PW
i= 1
j=1 S i j G i j + 1
Lsoftiou = 1 − PH PW
(13)

i= 1
j=1 S i j + G i j − S i j G i j + 1
H

W


1 XX
Gi j log S i j
Lbce = −
H×W
i=1 j=1



+ 1 − Gi j log 1 − S i j
(14)

1 + β2 × Precision × Recall
Lf m = 1 −
β2 × Precision + Recall

(15)

where H and W represent the height and width of the image,
respectively; Gi j represents the GT; and S i j denotes the predicted score map. We set β2 = 0.3, following the configuration
in [57].P
Precision
= (TP)/(TP+FP),
PHRecall
PW = (TP)/(TP+FN),
H PW
TP =
S i jGi j , FP =
i
=
1
j=1
i
=
1
j=1 S i j (1 − G i j ), and
P P
FN = iH=1 Wj=1 (1 − S i j )Gi j .
As shown in Fig. 2, for each encoder outputs O5 and
Mt (t = 1, 2, 3, 4), we generate predicted saliency maps St (t =
1, 2, 3, 4, 5) through a 3 × 3 and a 1 × 1 convolutional layer.
Meanwhile, to guide the generation of the edge prediction
pred
maps at , we apply edge supervision on the five MSEA
modules, where the GT of the edge map is extracted from
the GT using the Sobel operator.
Next, we upsample the low-resolution predicted saliency
pred
maps St and edge prediction maps at to the resolution of the
original image and compute the loss based on these upsampled
images and their corresponding GT. The total loss of the model
is defined as follows:
Ltotal =

5 h
X

Lbce (UP (Mt ) , G s ) + Lsoftiou (UP (Mt ) , G s )


pred

+ L f m (UP (Mt ) , G s )+Lbce UP at



TP
T + P − TP
N
1 X
nIoU =
IoUi
N
IoU =

t=1



drones, animals, ships, and vehicles of varying shapes
and sizes, providing pixel-level annotations.
Following [44] and [60], SIRST and NUDT-SIRST are split
50%/50% into training and test sets; per [36], IRSTD-1K is
divided 80%/20%.
2) Implementation Details: Model-driven methods are
implemented in MATLAB 2023, while data-driven methods use PyTorch [64], running on an Intel i7-12700 CPU
and NVIDIA 4090D GPU. Following previous works [61],
[65], [66], we uniformly resize images from the SIRST and
IRSTD-1K datasets to 512 × 512 and images from the NUDTSIRST dataset to 256 ×256. To prevent overfitting, the resized
images are then randomly cropped into training patches, with
SIRST and IRSTD-1K cropped to 480 × 480 and NUDTSIRST cropped to 240 × 240. In addition, random flipping
and rotation are applied to further augment the training data.
Training employs the Adam optimizer with an initial learning
rate of 0.001, a weight decay of 1×10−4 , and a batch size of 4.
SIRST and NUDT-SIRST are trained for 1500 epochs, while
IRSTD-1K is trained for 400 epochs. We compare with 17
SOTA methods, including 7 model-driven and 10 data-driven
approaches. Model-driven methods include filter-based (TopHat [4] and Max-Mean [5]), local contrast-based (LCM [6] and
MPCM [7]), and optimization-based (NRAM [39], PSTNN
[58], and TV-PCP [59]); data-driven methods include ACM
[42], ALCNet [60], ISNet [36], ISTDU-Net [25], RDIAN [61],
DNANet [44], UIUNet [43], MSHNet [62], SCTransNet [45],
and SeRankDet [63].
3) Evaluation Metrics: We employed common evaluation
metrics, including intersection over union (IoU), normalized
IoU (nIoU), probability of detection (Pd ), and false alarm rate
(Fa ). They are defined as

i

, Ge
(16)

where G s and Ge represent the GT of the target and target
edges, respectively, and UP denotes upsampling.
IV. E XPERIMENT AND A NALYSIS
A. Experimental Settings
1) Datasets: Experiments are conducted on three widely
used public IRSTD datasets.
1) SIRST [60]: The first real dataset focused on IRSTD,
comprising 427 short and mid wave images (some at
950-nm wavelength), spanning diverse scenes primarily
involving sky and sea, with resolutions ranging from
135 × 96 to 456 × 278.
2) NUDT-SIRST [44]: Comprise 1327 synthetic 256 × 256
images, covering urban and natural scenes (e.g., fields,
sea, and sky), with varied target types, sizes, and background complexities.
3) IRSTD-1K [36]: Include 1000 real 512 × 512 images,
spanning urban to natural landscapes (e.g., sea, rivers,
fields, mountains, and sky), with diverse targets like

(17)
(18)

i=1

TP
(19)
TP + FN
FP
(20)
Fa =
FP + TN
where N represents the total sample count; T and P are the
counts of GT and predicted positive pixels, respectively; and
TP, FP, and FN indicate the counts of true positives, false
positives, and false negatives in terms of pixels, respectively.
Pd =

B. Comparative Evaluation
1) Quantitative Results: Table I presents the quantitative
comparison results of our proposed ESSNet against 17 SOTA
IRSTD methods across three datasets. Model-driven methods,
which typically rely on specific scene assumptions and contrast priors, exhibit limited detection capabilities in complex
backgrounds and low-contrast target scenarios. In contrast,
data-driven methods demonstrate stronger adaptability to scene
diversity and heterogeneity due to their robust semantic feature extraction and lower sensitivity to parameter variations.
Meanwhile, our method outperforms other SOTA methods.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Fudan UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 12,2026 at 12:18:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LI et al.: EDGE-SEMANTIC SYNERGY NETWORK WITH EDGE-AWARE ATTENTION FOR IRSTD

5000417

TABLE I
P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISONS W ITH SOTA M ETHODS ON SIRST, NUDT-SIRST, AND IRSTD-1K IN I O U (%), N I O U (%), P D (%), AND F A (10−6 ).
T HE T WO B EST R ESULTS ARE M ARKED IN R ED AND B LUE

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 7. ROC curve comparison of different detection methods on (a) SIRST, (b) NUDT-SIRST, and (c) IRSTD-1K datasets. ESSNet achieves superior
performance with consistently high AUC values across all three datasets, demonstrating its robustness and adaptability in various scenarios.

In the Pd and Fa metrics, ESSNet demonstrates a clear
lead on all three public datasets. Specifically, in terms of
Pd , ESSNet achieves 96.32%, 99.55%, and 94.95% on the
three datasets, respectively, outperforming the second-ranked
method by 0.84%, 0.43%, and 1.60%. For Fa , ESSNet reaches
13.22 × 10−6 , 4.64 × 10−6 , and 12.33 × 10−6 , which are lower
than the second-ranked method by 0.16 × 10−6 , 0.852 × 10−6 ,
and 0.63 × 10−6 , respectively. It is worth noting that ESSNet
does not always obtain the best IoU and nIoU. For example,
SCTransNet’s nIoU on NUDT-SIRST is only 0.03% higher
than ours, but our Pd value is 1.32% higher than theirs. This
indicates that our algorithm achieves an excellent balance
between false alarms and detection accuracy, a balance that
is further evidenced by our leading performance in the Fa
metric.

Compared with the highly competitive SeRankDet method,
ESSNet achieves overall superiority on the NUDT-SIRST
and IRSTD-1K datasets, with IoU improvements of 0.87%
and 1.51%, respectively. On the SIRST dataset, although
SeRankDet attains a slightly higher IoU by 0.19%, ESSNet achieves a significantly lower Fa , reduced by 2.11 ×
10−6 , demonstrating its stronger capability in suppressing
complex background clutter. While SeRankDet commendably
explores Top-K squeeze in its attention mechanism, it lacks
the synergistic modeling of multilevel edge and semantic
information. ESSNet, however, leverages accurate boundary
localization, efficient feature extraction, and dynamic fusion
mechanisms to significantly enhance pixel-level segmentation
for infrared small targets. This capability not only effectively preserves target contour features but also improves

Authorized licensed use limited to: Fudan UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 12,2026 at 12:18:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5000417

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 64, 2026

Fig. 8. Visualization of detection results for different methods on representative images from the SIRST, NUDT-SIRST, and IRSTD-1K datasets. Red and
cyan boxes denote correct detections and missed detections, respectively, while yellow elliptical regions indicate false alarms.

the discriminability of subtle differences between targets and
backgrounds.
Across the three datasets, the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis, as shown in Fig. 7, aligns with
the quantitative evaluation in Table I. This analysis further
confirms that data-driven methods, particularly ESSNet, significantly outperform SOTA methods in terms of detection
performance stability and superiority, exhibiting the best curve
characteristics across all test scenarios.
Table I summarizes the comparative analysis of our proposed ESSNet against current SOTA methods in terms of
computational complexity and FPS. We conducted tests on
the NUDT-SIRST dataset at 256 × 256 resolution using an
RTX 4090D. ESSNet achieves outstanding performance with
a minimal 1.696 million (M) parameters and 26.27 GFLOPs
while attaining an inference speed of 38.03 FPS. Compared to the most competitive SOTA methods—SCTransNet
(11.19 M parameters, 20.24 GFLOPs, and 27.22 FPS) and
SeRankDet (108.89 M parameters, 140.95 GFLOPs, and
28.92 FPS)—ESSNet demonstrates significant advantages in
parameter count, computational complexity, and inference
speed.
2) Qualitative Results: We selected two representative
images from each of the SIRST, NUDT-SIRST, and
IRSTD-1K datasets to perform a visual comparison of different methods. Fig. 8 illustrates the qualitative comparison
of detection performance across these representative images,
while Fig. 9 presents the corresponding 3-D visualization
results. These results intuitively highlight the strengths and
limitations of each method, thereby complementing the quantitative analysis provided earlier. The rectangular background
colors of the method names indicate their categories: yellow
for model-based methods and blue for data-based methods.
Traditional model-based methods generate a large number

of false positives (marked with yellow circles) and miss
detections (marked with blue rectangles). These methods can
only detect targets with high contrast and are ineffective at
identifying targets concealed within the background. Even
when targets are detected, these methods struggle to accurately
delineate their contours.
In contrast, data-based methods, by learning multilevel
features from the data, can effectively distinguish targets
from background interference, exhibiting strong generalization capabilities. ESSNet integrates fine-grained local features
with global semantic context, consistently outperforming other
SOTA methods in detection performance. As shown in Figs. 8
and 9, although SCTransNet and SeRankDet are competitive
to some extent, in complex scenarios, such as in the third
row, these two methods sometimes produce false positives
(yellow circles) due to background interference (e.g., highcontrast areas at building edges). In contrast, ESSNet can
accurately identify targets hidden in building backgrounds,
avoiding the misclassification of high-contrast interference as
targets. This is because ESSNet not only integrates detailed
target information but also leverages global-scale contextual
information, generating high-level semantic representations of
the background to precisely capture its overall consistency.
Additionally, benefiting from the MSEA module, ESSNet
maintains high detection accuracy across various scenarios and
significantly improves the clarity and precision of target edges.
For example, in the fourth-row scenario, ESSNet can precisely
segment the contour of an autonomous aerial vehicle (AAV),
demonstrating exceptional performance advantages.

C. Ablation Study
In this section, we conducted a series of comprehensive
experiments to evaluate the effectiveness of ESSNet’s key

Authorized licensed use limited to: Fudan UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 12,2026 at 12:18:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LI et al.: EDGE-SEMANTIC SYNERGY NETWORK WITH EDGE-AWARE ATTENTION FOR IRSTD

5000417

Fig. 9. 3-D visualization comparison of detection results via different methods. The X- and Y-axes represent pixel coordinates, while the Z-axis represents
the pixel values of the final prediction map. This visualization intuitively highlights the intensity difference between the target pixels and the background. An
ideal result is a steep, tall spike at the target’s location with a clean background.

components across three datasets. Specifically, our investigation focused on the following aspects: 1) the individual
contribution of each module within ESSNet; 2) the necessity
of each component in the ESSM framework; and 3) the
effectiveness of individual components within the MSEA. To
ensure consistency and fairness, each variant experiment was
rigorously retrained using the same parameter settings and
datasets as those outlined in Section IV-A.
1) Ablation Study on Module-Wise Performance Gain: We
constructed a baseline model to perform an ablation analysis
on our proposed components. This baseline model includes a
standard U-Net architecture and our ResNet-based encoder but
removes all three of our proposed modules (ESSM, MLFF,
and MSEA). Specifically, ESSM and MSEA are replaced
with simple identity skip connections. In the decoder, the
MLFF module is replaced with a standard concatenation and
convolution fusion unit. Building on this baseline, we then
incrementally introduced the ESSM, MLFF, and MSEA modules to evaluate their individual and combined contributions to
detection performance. In ESSNet, the MSEA module played
a critical role. To further analyze its effect, we decomposed
the ESSM module into two distinct entities: ESSM w/o MSEA
and an isolated MSEA.
The experimental results, as shown in Table II and Fig. 10,
revealed the following key findings.
1) Each module can independently and significantly
improve detection performance, verifying the rationality
and necessity of their design.
2) By comparing Ablations (1) and (2), we found that
introducing the MLFF module optimized feature fusion

capabilities, improved detection metrics, and effectively
reduced Fa .
3) Comparing Ablations (1) and (4), it can be seen that
the addition of ESSM brought significant performance
improvements. ESSM, through sufficient interaction
between edge cues and deep semantic cues, significantly
enhanced the detection capability of targets, but there
were still cases of miss detections and false positives.
4) By comparing Ablations (3) and (5), we found that
incorporating MSEA into the ESSM module (compared to the version w/o MSEA) significantly improved
the precision of target edge detection, highlighting the
important role of MSEA in enhancing the network’s
ability to perceive edge details.
2) Ablation Study on ESSM: To validate the effectiveness
and necessity of each component in ESSM, we designed three
variants of ESSM and embedded them into the network for
evaluation: 1) removal of the DRB (w/o DRB); 2) removal
of the SGL module (w/o SGL); and 3) removal of the synergistic aggregation block (w/o SAB). The experimental results
demonstrate that each component of ESSM is indispensable,
as shown in Table III. Specifically, removing the DRB, which
serves as the core component of ESSM, significantly impairs
the network’s ability to extract detailed target features, resulting in the poorest performance among the three variants.
Across the three datasets, IoU decreases by 2.94%, 1.61%,
and 2.74%; Pd decreases by 2.43%, 2.08%, and 2.20%; and
Fa increases by 2.07 × 10−6 , 1.775 × 10−6 , and 1.93 × 10−6 ,
respectively. The removal of SGL diminishes the network’s
capability to model global contextual information, leading to a

Authorized licensed use limited to: Fudan UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 12,2026 at 12:18:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5000417

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 64, 2026

TABLE II
Q UANTITATIVE A BLATION S TUDY TO E VALUATE THE I MPACT OF C ORE C OMPONENTS ESSM, MLFF, AND MSEA IN ESSN ET

TABLE III
A BLATION S TUDY R ESULTS H IGHLIGHT THE N ECESSITY OF THE C OMPONENTS C ONSTITUTING ESSM

TABLE IV
A BLATION S TUDY ON THE I MPACT OF THE N UMBER OF D ILATED C ONVOLUTIONS (N) IN MSEA ON D ETECTION P ERFORMANCE

performance decline. Across the three datasets, IoU decreases
by 0.65%, 0.60%, and 0.63%, Pd decreases by 0.97%, 0.64%,
and 1.26%, and Fa increases by 1.52 × 10−6 , 0.483 × 10−6 ,
and 1.22 × 10−6 , respectively. Similarly, the removal of
SAB confines the model to feature interactions in the spatial
dimension, neglecting channel-wise feature correlations, which
reduces feature fusion efficiency and consequently degrades
performance. Across the three datasets, IoU decreases by
0.27%, 0.30%, and 0.34%; Pd decreases by 0.22%, 0.30%,
and 0.32%; and Fa increases by 0.47 × 10−6 , 0.329 × 10−6 ,
and 0.78 × 10−6 , respectively. These results quantitatively
demonstrate the indispensable role of each component.
To further assess the necessity of the meticulously designed
DRB component, we conducted experiments with four variants
of DRB: 1) removal of the gate mechanism (w/o Gate);
2) removal of the channel concatenation branch (w/o Concat); 3) removal of the element-wise addition branch (w/o
Addition); and 4) removal of the element-wise multiplication branch (w/o Multiplication). The experimental results, as

shown in Table III, indicate that removing the gate mechanism
causes DRB to lose its ability to refine current features,
making it susceptible to interference from irrelevant features.
Across the three datasets, IoU decreases by 0.04%, 0.22%,
and 0.17%; Pd decreases by 0.08%, 0.01%, and 0.59%; and
Fa increases by 0.37 × 10−6 , 0.48 × 10−6 , and 0.18 × 10−6 ,
respectively. Moreover, removing any of the branches (concatenation, addition, or multiplication) consistently degrades
the network’s performance. This suggests that the tri-branch
design of DRB enables the capture of more comprehensive
feature representations, fully leveraging feature diversity and
effectively minimizing information loss.
3) Ablation Study on MSEA: The performance of the
MSEA is influenced by the number of dilated convolutions
(N) in the multiscale context extraction step. As shown
in Table IV, as N increases from 0 to 3, performance
progressively improves, with the IoU on the three datasets
increasing by 1.07%, 2.65%, and 1.63%. The Fa decreases
by 20.36 × 10−6 , 3.794 × 10−6 , and 2.68 × 10−6 . This

Authorized licensed use limited to: Fudan UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 12,2026 at 12:18:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LI et al.: EDGE-SEMANTIC SYNERGY NETWORK WITH EDGE-AWARE ATTENTION FOR IRSTD

5000417

TABLE V
A BLATION S TUDY ON D ILATION R ATES W ITHIN THE MSEA M ODULE ON
THE IRSTD-1K DATASET

Fig. 11. Structures of four EFIA variants.

Fig. 10. Visual examples of key module effectiveness. Red and cyan boxes
denote correct detections and missed detections, respectively, while yellow
elliptical regions indicate false alarms.

trend, particularly the significant reduction in Fa , highlights
the pivotal role of multiscale receptive fields in reducing
background interference. However, when N = 4, although the
Fa for NUDT-SIRST and IRSTD-1K slightly decreased by
0.058 × 10−6 and 0.04 × 10−6 , respectively, the IoU on the
three datasets decreased by 0.04%, 0.09%, and 0.30%, and
the Pd decreased by 0.74%, 0.57%, and 0.63%, respectively,
indicating an overall performance degradation. We hypothesize
that an excessively large receptive field is detrimental to
small target detection. Although larger receptive fields can
capture remote context, they may also introduce irrelevant
interference from complex backgrounds, thereby drowning out
or weakening the subtle features of small targets. In contrast,
the N = 3 setting achieves a better balance by acquiring
sufficient local context while effectively avoiding excessive
background noise interference. Therefore, this study ultimately
selects N = 3 for optimal performance.
To investigate the impact of different dilation schemes, we
conducted an ablation study. As shown in Table V, {3, 5, 7}
achieves the best overall performance, yielding the highest IoU
and Pd of 71.86% and 94.95%, respectively, while reducing Fa
to 12.33 × 10−6 . In contrast, {7, 5, 3} performs the worst, with
the IoU dropping by 0.92%, indicating that a progressively
expanding receptive field is crucial. {2, 4, 8} produces a
competitive IoU but suffers from a higher Fa , increasing by
0.19 × 10−6 . Meanwhile, {1, 3, 5} and {2, 3, 4} show moderate
results without distinct advantages. These findings suggest that
{3, 5, 7} achieves the best balance between detail preservation
and background suppression and is therefore adopted as the
final design.
To further validate the unique contribution of the edge
embedding mechanism in the EFIA, we introduce four variants
of the EFIA, as illustrated in Fig. 11. These variants include:

1) standard channel–spatial attention (i.e., EFIA without edge
supervision and embedding); 2) edge-supervised attention (i.e.,
EFIA without edge embedding); 3) dual-CA branch architecture; and 4) the complete EFIA. Comparative analysis
in Table VI reveals that the introduction of edge supervision [Ablation (1) versus Ablation (2)] significantly enhances
model performance, indicating that edge information, as a
supervisory signal, strengthens feature learning. Specifically,
the reduction in Fa demonstrates that, even under extreme
conditions such as tiny targets, blurred boundaries, and noisy
or imperfect GT, the Sobel-based edge label generation still
works effectively as an auxiliary supervisory signal. Meanwhile, the primary segmentation losses (Lsoftiou , Lbce , and
Lf m ) applied to the main GT G s further enhance robustness.
Furthermore, incorporating edge embedding on top of edge
supervision [Ablation (2) versus Ablation (4)] yields additional
performance improvements. This gain stems from EFIA’s
ability to dynamically integrate edge information into the
spatial attention map through explicit supervision, thereby
significantly enhancing the discriminability of target boundary
features. Additionally, comparing Ablations (3) and (4), the
former exhibits slightly inferior performance compared to the
complete EFIA. This is because the parallel dual-channel
branches independently adjust the channel weights of each
branch, leading to decoupled feature distributions between the
two branches. Consequently, this introduces noise in modeling
the correlation between target edges and contextual regions. In
contrast, EFIA leverages features processed by a shared CA,
ensuring that the inputs to both the edge supervision branch
and the SA branch maintain a consistent channel feature
distribution.
To verify the actual contribution of deep-layer edge supervision, we conducted an ablation study comparing the complete
ESSNet with a key variant, w/o Edge Sup. (L5), which
removes the edge loss supervision on the fifth-layer features
only. As shown in Table VII, the results clearly demonstrate
the significant effectiveness of deep-layer edge supervision. On
the NUDT-SIRST dataset, the complete ESSNet outperformed
w/o Edge Sup. (L5), with IoU increased by 0.15%, Pd by

Authorized licensed use limited to: Fudan UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 12,2026 at 12:18:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5000417

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 64, 2026

TABLE IX
P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON ON THE IRSTD-1K DATASET ACROSS
D IFFERENT TARGET S IZES ( IN P IXELS )

Fig. 12. Visualization comparison of the effectiveness of deep-layer edge
supervision. The figure illustrates the output feature maps and their 3-D
visualizations from the deepest MSEA module (L5) for two scenarios, with
and without deep-layer edge supervision. In 3-D visualizations, the red boxes
indicate the true target, while the black boxes indicate false alarms.
TABLE VI
A BLATION S TUDY ON THE U NIQUE C ONTRIBUTION OF
E DGE E MBEDDING IN EIFA

TABLE VII
A BLATION S TUDY ON THE E FFECTIVENESS OF D EEP -L AYER
E DGE S UPERVISION (L5)

composite loss function, we conducted an ablation study. We
adopted Lsoftiou as the baseline loss and further evaluated
the effects of additionally incorporating Lbce , Lf m , as well
as their combination. As shown in Table VIII, the baseline
with only Lsoftiou already achieves reasonably good performance. Building on this, introducing Lbce leads to overall
improvements, particularly in terms of IoU. For example, on
the IRSTD-1K dataset, the IoU increases from 70.55% to
71.34%, highlighting the importance of pixel-level supervision
in enhancing target shape alignment. On the other hand,
incorporating Lf m significantly reduces the Fa . For instance,
on the NUDT-SIRST dataset, Fa decreases from 6.367 × 10−6
to 5.298 × 10−6 , demonstrating its effectiveness in suppressing
background interference. Finally, when all three components
are combined, the model achieves the best performance across
all key metrics. This confirms that the composite loss is not a
redundant aggregation but a complementary and indispensable
integration, whose synergy effectively guides the model toward
optimal detection performance.
D. Target Size Sensitivity Analysis

TABLE VIII
A BLATION S TUDY ON THE C OMPOSITION OF THE L OSS F UNCTION

0.84%, and Fa reduced by 2.744 × 10−6 . Similar advantages
were consistently observed on the IRSTD-1K. Fig. 12 presents
the output feature maps of the MSEA at L5. Without deeplayer edge supervision, the deep-layer feature maps [w/o Edge
Sup. (L5)] tend to produce false activations in high-contrast
or complex background regions, resulting in multiple spurious
peaks competing with the true target. In contrast, the complete
ESSNet effectively suppresses such interference and generates
clean feature maps with a single sharp activation peak precisely at the true target location. This striking visual difference
provides direct evidence that deep-layer edge supervision plays
a key role in enhancing and sustaining the responses of weak
targets while suppressing background interference, thereby
confirming the rationality and necessity of our design.
4) Effectiveness of the Loss Function Design: To verify
the complementarity and necessity of each component in our

To investigate the sensitivity of ESSNet to targets of different sizes, we conducted an analysis on the IRSTD-1K dataset.
Based on a statistical analysis of the target size distribution,
we split the targets into three different size levels according
to the number of pixels: (0, 36], (36, 81], and (81, +∞].
We compared ESSNet against the U-Net baseline (Ablation
(1), Table II), the variant without edge supervision (Ablation
(2), Table VI), and the second-best method, SeRankDet, to
quantify performance across different target sizes. As shown
in Table IX, all methods exhibit reduced performance with
smaller targets due to the fewer pixels and blurrier contours,
which hinder precise segmentation. Nevertheless, ESSNet consistently outperforms all methods across all size categories.
For the most challenging (0, 36] range, ESSNet achieves an
IoU of 49.59%, significantly surpassing the baseline (40.55%)
and SeRankDet (47.95%). This robustness stems from explicit
edge supervision, which enhances detection of faint contours
that other models struggle to capture. The variant without edge
supervision performs comparably to SeRankDet across all size
ranges, indicating that ESSNet’s edge-semantic synergistic
paradigm is already competitive with SOTA methods. With
edge supervision, ESSNet further improves IoU by 1.79%
in (0, 36], 1.66% in (36, 81], and 0.48% in (81, +∞],
demonstrating edge supervision’s pronounced effectiveness for
small targets. These results confirm that edge supervision
consistently enhances detection performance across all target
sizes, with the most significant improvements for small targets.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Fudan UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 12,2026 at 12:18:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LI et al.: EDGE-SEMANTIC SYNERGY NETWORK WITH EDGE-AWARE ATTENTION FOR IRSTD

Fig. 13. Visualization of robustness comparison for different methods in
challenging scenarios. (1) and (2) show low SNR scenarios, while (3) and
(4) show strong clutter environments. Red and cyan boxes denote correct
detections and missed detections, respectively, while yellow elliptical regions
indicate false alarms.

E. Robustness Analysis
To evaluate the robustness of ESSNet in more challenging
environments, we conducted experiments on infrared images
under low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) and strong clutter conditions and compared the results with two SOTA methods,
SCTransNet and SeRankDet. The experimental results are
shown in Fig. 13. In scenarios (1), (3), and (4), SCTransNet
and SeRankDet suffer from missed detections and numerous
false alarms due to interference from low contrast, cloud edges,
and complex rock walls. In contrast, ESSNet demonstrates
superior robustness, accurately detecting the targets without
producing any false alarms. However, ESSNet may still face
challenges under certain extreme conditions. For example, in
scenario (2), the target is embedded in a background with
high noise and heavy clutter, leading to a false alarm. In
such cases, even human experts struggle to make accurate
judgments. Therefore, ESSNet still exhibits limitations in these
extreme scenarios. We believe that addressing the challenges
of complex backgrounds remains a frontier topic in this field
and will be a key focus for future research. These challenges
may stem from the difficulty of extracting sufficient semantic
information from single-frame images. A promising direction for improvement is to leverage spatiotemporal semantic
information from multiframe sequences, which could enhance
detection accuracy and robustness.
V. C ONCLUSION
This article tackles the challenges in IRSTD arising from
small target sizes, blurry edges, and complex background
interference by proposing a novel ESSNet, which significantly enhances detection performance. ESSNet achieves deep
synergy between edge and semantic information through the
ESSM, MSEA, and MLFF. ESSM facilitates multilevel feature
interaction via long-range level modulation, MSEA optimizes
the attention mechanism through explicit edge supervision to

5000417

improve boundary detection precision, and MLFF alleviates
semantic degradation with a layer-wise guidance mechanism,
ensuring the integrity of target structures. Experiments on the
SIRST, NUDT-SIRST, and IRSTD-1K datasets demonstrate
that ESSNet substantially outperforms existing methods on key
performance metrics, achieving SOTA results and confirming
the effectiveness of the proposed approach. Moreover, ablation
studies further validate the indispensable roles of ESSM,
MSEA, and MLFF in edge-semantic synergy, providing an
efficient solution for IRSTD tasks.
Although ESSNet demonstrates excellent performance and
robustness, its single-frame detection capability still has limitations under extremely low SNR and heavy clutter. To address
this, our future research will focus on three key directions.
First, we plan to incorporate spatiotemporal information by
exploiting multiframe cues to overcome the inherent bottlenecks of single-frame detection. Second, we aim to integrate
multimodal data, such as visible light or radar, to alleviate semantic ambiguity through complementary information.
Third, we will pursue model lightweighting via techniques
such as quantization and pruning to enable real-time embedded
deployment on platforms like drones. We believe that progress
along these directions will substantially promote the applicability of this technology in real-world scenarios.
R EFERENCES
[1]

M. Zhao, W. Li, L. Li, J. Hu, P. Ma, and R. Tao, “Single-frame infrared
small-target detection: A survey,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Mag.,
vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 87–119, Jun. 2022.
[2] R. Kou et al., “Infrared small target segmentation networks: A survey,”
Pattern Recognit., vol. 143, Nov. 2023, Art. no. 109788.
[3] K. Zhang, S. Ni, D. Yan, and A. Zhang, “Review of dim small target
detection algorithms in single-frame infrared images,” in Proc. IEEE
4th Adv. Inf. Manage., Communicates, Electron. Autom. Control Conf.
(IMCEC), vol. 4, Jun. 2021, pp. 2115–2120.
[4] V. T. Tom, T. Peli, M. Leung, and J. E. Bondaryk, “Morphology-based
algorithm for point target detection in infrared backgrounds,” Proc.
SPIE, vol. 1954, pp. 2–11, Oct. 1993.
[5] S. D. Deshpande, M. H. Er, R. Venkateswarlu, and P. Chan, “Maxmean and max-median filters for detection of small targets,” Proc. SPIE,
vol. 3809, pp. 74–83, Oct. 1999.
[6] C. L. P. Chen, H. Li, Y. Wei, T. Xia, and Y. Y. Tang, “A local contrast
method for small infrared target detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
Sens., vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 574–581, Jan. 2014.
[7] Y. Wei, X. You, and H. Li, “Multiscale patch-based contrast measure for
small infrared target detection,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 58, pp. 216–226,
Oct. 2016.
[8] J. Han, Y. Ma, B. Zhou, F. Fan, K. Liang, and Y. Fang, “A robust infrared
small target detection algorithm based on human visual system,” IEEE
Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 11, no. 12, pp. 2168–2172, Dec. 2014.
[9] J. Han, K. Liang, B. Zhou, X. Zhu, J. Zhao, and L. Zhao, “Infrared small
target detection utilizing the multiscale relative local contrast measure,”
IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 612–616, Apr. 2018.
[10] Y. Shi, Y. Wei, H. Yao, D. Pan, and G. Xiao, “High-boost-based
multiscale local contrast measure for infrared small target detection,”
IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 33–37, Jan. 2018.
[11] J. Han, Y. Yu, K. Liang, and H. Zhang, “Infrared small-target detection
under complex background based on subblock-level ratio-difference joint
local contrast measure,” Opt. Eng., vol. 57, no. 10, Oct. 2018, Art. no.
103105.
[12] Y. Dai and Y. Wu, “Reweighted infrared patch-tensor model with
both nonlocal and local priors for single-frame small target detection,”
IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 10, no. 8,
pp. 3752–3767, Aug. 2017.
[13] Y. Dai, Y. Wu, Y. Song, and J. Guo, “Non-negative infrared patch-image
model: Robust target-background separation via partial sum minimization of singular values,” Infr. Phys. Technol., vol. 81, pp. 182–194, Mar.
2017.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Fudan UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 12,2026 at 12:18:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5000417

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 64, 2026

[14] T. Liu, J. Yang, B. Li, Y. Wang, and W. An, “Infrared small target
detection via nonconvex tensor Tucker decomposition with factor prior,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, Jul. 2023, Art. no. 5617317.
[15] T. Liu et al., “Nonconvex tensor low-rank approximation for infrared
small target detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60,
pp. 1–18, 2021.
[16] T. Liu, J. Yang, B. Li, Y. Wang, and W. An, “Representative coefficient
total variation for efficient infrared small target detection,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5622918.
[17] Z. Yang, H. Yu, J. Zhang, Q. Tang, and A. Mian, “Deep learning based
infrared small object segmentation: Challenges and future directions,”
Inf. Fusion, vol. 118, Jun. 2025, Art. no. 103007.
[18] N. Kumar and P. Singh, “Small and dim target detection in IR imagery:
A review,” 2023, arXiv:2311.16346.
[19] B. Li et al., “Mixed-precision network quantization for infrared small
target segmentation,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024,
Art. no. 5000812.
[20] B. Li et al., “Monte Carlo linear clustering with single-point supervision
is enough for infrared small target detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int.
Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2023, pp. 1009–1019.
[21] X. Ying et al., “Mapping degeneration meets label evolution: Learning
infrared small target detection with single point supervision,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023,
pp. 15528–15538.
[22] H. Wang, L. Zhou, and L. Wang, “Miss detection vs. false alarm:
Adversarial learning for small object segmentation in infrared images,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019,
pp. 8508–8517.
[23] Z. Wang, C. Wang, X. Li, C. Xia, and J. Xu, “MLP-Net: Multilayer
perceptron fusion network for infrared small target detection,” IEEE
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 63, 2025, Art. no. 5601313.
[24] W. Duan et al., “Semi-supervised multiview prototype learning with
motion reconstruction for moving infrared small target detection,” IEEE
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 63, 2025, Art. no. 5001215.
[25] Q. Hou, L. Zhang, F. Tan, Y. Xi, H. Zheng, and N. Li, “ISTDU-Net:
Infrared small-target detection U-Net,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett.,
vol. 19, pp. 1–5, 2022.
[26] C. Yu et al., “Pay attention to local contrast learning networks for
infrared small target detection,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett.,
vol. 19, pp. 1–5, 2022.
[27] J. Zhao, Z. Shi, C. Yu, Y. Liu, X. Ying, and Y. Dai, “Multi-scale
direction-aware network for infrared small target detection,” 2024,
arXiv:2406.02037.
[28] S. Xu et al., “HCF-Net: Hierarchical context fusion network for infrared
small object detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Multimedia Expo
(ICME), Jul. 2024, pp. 1–6.
[29] X. Zhang, X. Zhang, S.-Y. Cao, B. Yu, C. Zhang, and H.-L. Shen,
“MRF3Net: An infrared small target detection network using multireceptive field perception and effective feature fusion,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5629414.
[30] F. Zhang, H. Hu, B. Zou, and M. Luo, “M4Net: Multi-level multi-patch
multi-receptive multi-dimensional attention network for infrared small
target detection,” Neural Netw., vol. 183, Mar. 2025, Art. no. 107026.
[31] F. Lin, K. Bao, Y. Li, D. Zeng, and S. Ge, “Learning contrast-enhanced
shape-biased representations for infrared small target detection,” IEEE
Trans. Image Process., vol. 33, pp. 3047–3058, 2024.
[32] F. Lin, S. Ge, K. Bao, C. Yan, and D. Zeng, “Learning shapebiased representations for infrared small target detection,” IEEE Trans.
Multimedia, vol. 26, pp. 4681–4692, 2024.
[33] X. Tong et al., “MSAFFNet: A multiscale label-supervised attention
feature fusion network for infrared small target detection,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5002616.
[34] Q. Li, M. Zhang, Z. Yang, Y. Yuan, and Q. Wang, “Edge-guided
perceptual network for infrared small target detection,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5643510.
[35] Q. Li, W. Zhang, W. Lu, and Q. Wang, “Multibranch mutual-guiding
learning for infrared small target detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
Sens., vol. 63, 2025, Art. no. 5605710.
[36] M. Zhang, R. Zhang, Y. Yang, H. Bai, J. Zhang, and J. Guo, “ISNet:
Shape matters for infrared small target detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 877–886.
[37] C. Gao, D. Meng, Y. Yang, Y. Wang, X. Zhou, and A. G. Hauptmann,
“Infrared patch-image model for small target detection in a single
image,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 22, no. 12, pp. 4996–5009,
Dec. 2013.

[38] Y. Dai, Y. Wu, and Y. Song, “Infrared small target and background separation via column-wise weighted robust principal component analysis,”
Infr. Phys. Technol., vol. 77, pp. 421–430, Jul. 2016.
[39] L. Zhang, L. Peng, T. Zhang, S. Cao, and Z. Peng, “Infrared small
target detection via non-convex rank approximation minimization joint
l2,1 norm,” Remote Sens., vol. 10, no. 11, p. 1821, Nov. 2018.
[40] L. Ding, X. Xu, Y. Cao, G. Zhai, F. Yang, and L. Qian, “Detection
and tracking of infrared small target by jointly using SSD and pipeline
filter,” Digit. Signal Process., vol. 110, Mar. 2021, Art. no. 102949.
[41] R. Li and Y. Shen, “YOLOSR-IST: A deep learning method for small
target detection in infrared remote sensing images based on superresolution and YOLO,” Signal Process., vol. 208, Jul. 2023, Art. no.
108962.
[42] Y. Dai, Y. Wu, F. Zhou, and K. Barnard, “Asymmetric contextual
modulation for infrared small target detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis., Oct. 2021, pp. 950–959.
[43] X. Wu, D. Hong, and J. Chanussot, “UIU-Net: U-Net in U-Net for
infrared small object detection,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 32,
pp. 364–376, 2023.
[44] B. Li et al., “Dense nested attention network for infrared small target
detection,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 32, pp. 1745–1758, 2023.
[45] S. Yuan, H. Qin, X. Yan, N. Akhtar, and A. Mian, “SCTransNet: Spatialchannel cross transformer network for infrared small target detection,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5002615.
[46] R. Yao, W. Li, Y. Zhou, J. Sun, Z. Yin, and J. Zhao, “Dual-stream edgetarget learning network for infrared small target detection,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5007314.
[47] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for
image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 770–778.
[48] F. Yu and V. Koltun, “Multi-scale context aggregation by dilated
convolutions,” 2015, arXiv:1511.07122.
[49] S. Woo, J. Park, J.-Y. Lee, and I. S. Kweon, “CBAM: Convolutional
block attention module,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., Sep. 2018,
pp. 3–19.
[50] M. Lin, Q. Chen, and S. Yan, “Network in network,” 2013,
arXiv:1312.4400.
[51] J. Fu et al., “Dual attention network for scene segmentation,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2019,
pp. 3146–3154.
[52] X. Qin, Z. Zhang, C. Huang, C. Gao, M. Dehghan, and M. Jagersand, “BASNet: Boundary-aware salient object detection,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2019,
pp. 7479–7489.
[53] M. A. Rahman and Y. Wang, “Optimizing intersection-over-union in
deep neural networks for image segmentation,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Vis.
Comput. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2016, pp. 234–244.
[54] K. Zhao, S. Gao, W. Wang, and M.-M. Cheng, “Optimizing the Fmeasure for threshold-free salient object detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., Oct. 2019, pp. 8849–8857.
[55] G. Li, Z. Liu, W. Lin, and H. Ling, “Multi-content complementation
network for salient object detection in optical remote sensing images,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, pp. 1–13, 2021.
[56] B. Wan et al., “MFFNet: Multi-modal feature fusion network for
V-D-T salient object detection,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia, vol. 26,
pp. 2069–2081, 2024.
[57] Z. Zuo et al., “AFFPN: Attention fusion feature pyramid network for
small infrared target detection,” Remote Sens., vol. 14, no. 14, p. 3412,
Jul. 2022.
[58] L. Zhang and Z. Peng, “Infrared small target detection based on partial
sum of the tensor nuclear norm,” Remote Sens., vol. 11, no. 4, p. 382,
Feb. 2019.
[59] X. Wang, Z. Peng, D. Kong, P. Zhang, and Y. He, “Infrared dim target
detection based on total variation regularization and principal component
pursuit,” Image Vis. Comput., vol. 63, pp. 1–9, Jul. 2017.
[60] Y. Dai, Y. Wu, F. Zhou, and K. Barnard, “Attentional local contrast
networks for infrared small target detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 59, no. 11, pp. 9813–9824, Nov. 2021.
[61] H. Sun, J. Bai, F. Yang, and X. Bai, “Receptive-field and direction
induced attention network for infrared dim small target detection with a
large-scale dataset IRDST,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61,
2023, Art. no. 5000513.
[62] Q. Liu, R. Liu, B. Zheng, H. Wang, and F. Ying, “Infrared small target
detection with scale and location sensitivity,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2024, pp. 17490–17499.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Fudan UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 12,2026 at 12:18:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LI et al.: EDGE-SEMANTIC SYNERGY NETWORK WITH EDGE-AWARE ATTENTION FOR IRSTD

[63] Y. Dai et al., “Pick of the bunch: Detecting infrared small targets
beyond hit-miss trade-offs via selective rank-aware attention,” IEEE
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5006215.
[64] A. Paszke et al., “PyTorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep
learning library,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 32, 2019,
pp. 8026–8037.
[65] G. Chen, Z. Wang, W. Wang, X. Li, and H. Wu, “Holistic modularization
of local contrast in the end-to-end network for infrared small target
detection,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 20, pp. 1–5, 2023.
[66] K. Wang et al., “AFE-Net: Attention-guided feature enhancement network for infrared small target detection,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth
Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 17, pp. 4208–4221, 2024.

Maoyong Li received the B.S. degree from Yantai
University, Yantai, China, in 2019. He is currently
pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the School of
Instrument Science and Optoelectronic Engineering,
Beijing Information Science and Technology University, Beijing, China.
His research interests include infrared image
understanding and deep learning.

Yingying Gao received the M.S. degree from
Heilongjiang Bayi Agricultural University, Daqing,
China, in 2024. She is currently pursuing the
Ph.D. degree with the School of Instrument Science
and Optoelectronic Engineering, Beijing Information
Science and Technology University, Beijing, China.
Her research interests include computer vision and
deep learning.

Xuedong Guo received the M.S. degree in control
engineering from Foshan University, Foshan, China,
in 2022. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree
with Beijing Information Science and Technology
University, Beijing, China.
His research interests include computer vision and
deep learning.

5000417

Zhixiang Chen (Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
degree in microelectronics from Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China, in 2010, and the Ph.D. degree
in control science and engineering from Tsinghua
University, Beijing, China, in 2017.
He was a Post-Doctoral Research Associate
at Imperial College London, London, U.K., and
Tsinghua University. He is currently a Lecturer at the
Department of Computer Science, The University
of Sheffield, Sheffield, U.K. His research interests
include computer vision and machine learning.

Lei Deng received the B.S. degree from Beijing
Institute of Technology University, Beijing, China, in
2009, and the Ph.D. degree from the Department of
Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, in 2016.
He was a Post-Doctoral Research Associate at
Tsinghua University. He is currently a Lecturer at
Beijing Information Science and Technology University, Beijing. His research interests include image
fusion, computer vision, and deep learning.

Mingli Dong received the M.Sc. degree from Hefei
University of Technology, Hefei, China, in 1989, and
the Ph.D. degree from Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China, in 2009.
Since 2008, she has been a Professor with
Beijing Information Science and Technology University, Beijing, where she is the Dean of the
School of Instrument Science and Opto-Electronics
Engineering. Her research interests include sensing
technology, photoelectric measurement technology,
and precision measurement.

Lianqing Zhu received the M.S. degree from Hefei
University of Technology, Hefei, China, in 1989, and
the Ph.D. degree from Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China, in 2013.
Since 2004, he has been a Professor with Beijing
Information Science and Technology University,
Beijing, China. He is the Leader with the Yangtze
River Scholars Innovation Team, the National Key
Talent, the National Outstanding Mid-Aged Expert,
and the Science and Technology Beijing Leader
Talent. His research interests include sensing technology, biomedical detection technology, and precision measurement.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Fudan UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 12,2026 at 12:18:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

