IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 64, 2026

4202020

UNet-NNI: A Collaborative Inpainting Method
Based on Deep-Sea Multibeam Backscatter
Intensity Images
Haiyang Hu , Ziyin Wu , Mingwei Wang , Tian Zhou , Fanlin Yang, and Jianbing Chen

Abstract—The long acoustic path and the complexity of deepsea environments make it difficult to obtain complete and reliable
multibeam backscatter intensity data, often resulting in central
beam anomalies and/or missing and erroneous measurements.
To address this challenge, this study developed a joint U-shaped
network (UNet)-nearest neighbor interpolation (NNI) inpainting
method for deep-sea multibeam backscatter intensity images.
First, a UNet-multiscale channel spatial attention (MCSA) model
combining shortcut connections (SCs) and the MCSA mechanism
was developed and trained on backscatter data obtained from
U.K. waters, with data from a Pacific deep-sea region used for
validation. Then, a collaborative UNet-NNI framework was constructed by integrating histogram matching with NNI to improve
clarity in large-gap regions. Experimental results demonstrated
that the proposed approach achieves higher structural fidelity
and better intensity consistency than realized using classical
interpolation and conventional deep learning methods, across
both simulated and real data. The method effectively inpaints
large-scale missing regions, and produces visually and physically consistent intensity images, thereby providing a practical
deep–shallow hybrid paradigm for deep-sea multibeam backscatter inpainting.
Received 2 September 2025; revised 21 December 2025; accepted 26
January 2026. Date of publication 2 February 2026;
date of current version13 February 2026.
This work was supported in part by the National KeyResearch and Devel
opment Program of China under Grant 2022YFC2806600and Grant 2022YF
C2806605; in part by the Specialized Scientifi
c ResearchFund of State Key Laboratory of Submarine Geoscience u
nder GrantSGLabZZKT2025-02;
in part by the National Natural Science Foundationof China under Gran
t 42306210;
in part by the Oceanic InterdisciplinaryProgram of FudanJiao Tong Univ
ersity under Grant SL2023ZD203; inpart by the Scientifi
Guangzhou, underc Research
Grant KLMMR-2024G09.
(Corresponding
author:
Fund of the Second Institute
of Oceanography,
Ziyin Wu.)
Ministry of Natural Resources, China, under Grant SZ2405;
Haiyang Hu
TianbyZhou
with the ofNational
Key Laboratory
of
andand
in part
theKeyare
Laboratory
Marine Mineral
Resources,
Underwater Acoustic Technology, Harbin Engineering
Harbin
Ministry of University,
Natural Resources,
150001, China, also with the Key Laboratory of Marine Information Acquisition and Security (Harbin Engineering University), Ministry of Industry and
Information Technology, Harbin 150001, China, and also with the College
of Underwater Acoustic Engineering, Harbin Engineering University, Harbin
150001, China (e-mail: hhy990224@163.com; zhoutian@hrbeu.edu.cn).
Ziyin Wu is with the College of Underwater Acoustic Engineering,
Harbin Engineering University, Harbin 150001, China, and also with the
State Key Laboratory of Submarine Geoscience, Second Institute of Oceanography, Ministry of Natural Resources, Hangzhou 310012, China (e-mail:
zywu@sio.org.cn).
Mingwei Wang is with the State Key Laboratory of Submarine Geoscience,
Second Institute of Oceanography, Ministry of Natural Resources, Hangzhou
310012, China (e-mail: wangmw@sio.org.cn).
Fanlin Yang and Jianbing Chen are with the College of Geodesy and Geomatics, Shandong University of Science and Technology, Qingdao 266590,
China (e-mail: Yang723@163.com; chen@sdust.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TGRS.2026.3659210

Index Terms—Attention mechanism, deep-sea multibeam
backscatter intensity, image inpainting, nearest neighbor interpolation (NNI) method, U-shaped network (UNet).

I. I NTRODUCTION

T

HE deep-sea, as a crucial base for human sustainable
development [1], is rich in mineral and fishery resources.
However, its complex and fragile ecological systems and
observational challenges have hindered exploration efforts [2].
Therefore, obtaining precise seabed observations has become
critical in developing deep-sea resources. In response, many
countries are gradually launching related deep-sea exploration
programs and strategies, such as the “Digital Deep-Sea Typical
Habitat Ocean Science Program” (China), “Ocean Observation Program” (United States), and “Blue Growth Strategy”
(European Union), among others. These initiatives focus on
deep-sea ecological analysis and protection [3], [4], resource
assessment and development [5], [6], and military applications
and security. In addition, experts and researchers are encouraged to participate in technological research and development,
advancing the precise and 3-D deep-sea exploration process.
Deep-sea exploration equipment primarily includes humanoccupied vehicle (HOV) submersibles, autonomous underwater vehicles (AUVs), remotely operated vehicle (ROVs),
multibeam echo sounders (MBESs), side-scan sonars, synthetic aperture sonars, and deep-sea sampling equipment.
MBES have become a core technological tool for deep-sea
scientific research owing to their high-precision and comprehensive coverage. Following over 50 years of development,
multibeam bathymetric data processing technology and software systems have become relatively mature. Bathymetric
point cloud data are used widely in the construction of digital
terrain models of the seabed in both deep and shallow waters
[7], [8], [9]. Full water column acoustic scattering data records
the total backscatter intensity of sound waves as they pass
through the water column to reach the seabed. Thus, such
data can be divided into water column and seabed backscatter
intensity data. Water column intensity data are used extensively in marine 3-D observations, such as the detection of
aquatic organisms like kelp [10], coral [11], and fish [12],
measurement of suspended sediment concentrations [13], and
identification of plumes [14]. Seabed backscatter intensity
data are fundamental for conducting acoustic classification of
shallow-water seabed sediments. The processing of such data

1558-0644 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Fudan UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 13,2026 at 13:01:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4202020

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 64, 2026

is based on the active sonar equation [15], [16] and requires
corrections for factors such as systematic errors, propagation
losses, acoustic illumination area, angular response, and central anomalies, before the data can provide a foundational basis
for identification and classification analysis of various shallowwater seabed features [17], [18], [19], [20].
However, under deep-sea conditions, the long acoustic
path and the complexity of the unknown environment make
obtaining comprehensive seabed backscatter data extremely
challenging. The resulting seabed backscatter mosaic intensity
images often exhibit problems such as central beam anomalies
and/or missed and erroneous measurements. To address these
problems, noise (i.e., central beam anomalies and erroneous
measurements) is typically removed first, followed by the
adoption of interpolation methods (e.g., nearest neighbor interpolation (NNI), natural neighbor interpolation (NaNI), linear
interpolation (LI), and cubic interpolation (CI) methods) [21]
to inpaint the gaps. The advantage of this approach is that
it does not rely on prior models, makes few assumptions
about the data, and generally maintains consistency with
the grayscale distribution of the original image. We found
that conventional interpolation methods have good inpainting
effects on smaller missing areas during the inpainting process.
However, obvious jagged edges, blurring, and incomplete
inpaints occur in larger missing areas. Therefore, there is
an urgent need to construct a more stable and generalizable
intensity image inpainting model.
With the development of artificial intelligence, conventional interpolation methods are no longer sufficient to meet
the increasingly sophisticated demands of inpainting. Consequently, achieving high-precision and detailed inpainting
through deep learning methods has become the primary
approach in image inpainting [22], [23]. In current deeplearning-based image inpainting research, applications are
categorized based on their use cases into remote sensing
images [24], [25], deep images (3-D structures) [26], [27],
medical images [28], [29], and panoramic images [30], [31];
based on the extent of image damage, they are categorized into
rectangular gaps and irregular gaps; and based on network
structure, they are classified into autoencoder (AE) [32],
generative adversarial network (GAN) [33], U-shaped network
(UNet) [34], and their combined variants. Among these, image
inpainting models based on the UNet structure have demonstrated notable advantages [35], [36]. Chen et al. [37] utilized
the UNet structure to construct a denoising diffusion model,
and combined it with crack perception scores to achieve
accurate and coherent inpainting of image patches and crack
traces. Wang et al. [38] built a lightweight multiscale guided
diffusion model around the UNet framework to efficiently
capture pixel dependencies, enabling inpainting of underwater
fish detection images. Zhang et al. [39] used the UNet structure
as the backbone network and combined it with a custom
nonlinear activation free network and anchor strip attention
mechanism to construct a model, achieving a parallel image
inpainting method guided by both text and images. Zhang et al.
[40] incorporated domain knowledge into the UNet structure
and proposed a comprehensive inpainting diffusion model
for weather radar data. Overall, UNet-based image inpainting

methods have demonstrated good performance in filling gaps
in image products across the domains above. However, owing
to multibeam backscatter intensity data scarcity for deep-sea
acoustic detection, research on filling gaps in seabed intensity
images remains largely unexplored.
Therefore, this study selected many shallow-water multibeam backscatter intensity images as a sample set to train
an intensity image inpainting model, and several deep-water
multibeam backscatter intensity images were used to verify
the model’s generalizability. On the one hand, the UNet
architecture was adopted as the backbone, integrated with
shortcut connection (SC) modules and multiscale channel spatial attention (MCSA) mechanisms to construct a multibeam
backscatter intensity image inpainting model. This approach
balances the rationality of feature dimension matching, while
enhancing the correlation between multiscale features, making
it more adaptable for image inpainting in complex scenarios
and improving its generalization capability. On the other hand,
we leveraged the advantage of the NNI method in preserving
the original grayscale distribution of the images. By combining
the intensity images inpainted by the UNet-MCSA model
with histogram matching, we improved the clarity of images
with substantial gaps, providing insights and strategies for
inpainting deep-sea acoustic images.
II. M ATERIALS AND M ETHODS
The overall workflow is illustrated in Fig. 1. First, based
on the UNet architecture, we constructed the UNet-MCSA
model, which incorporates the residual block (ResBlock),
SC, subsampling block (SB), upsampling block (UB), and
the MCSA block. UNet-MCSA serves as the deep inpainting model, designed to reconstruct multibeam backscatter
intensity images with gaps of different sizes. Second, for
large missing regions where deep learning networks tend to
produce blurred or oversmoothed results, we further extended
the model and developed a collaborative model—UNetNNI. This model integrates the UNet-MCSA output with
NNI through histogram matching, combining the structural
continuity learned by UNet-MCSA with the grayscale consistency retained by interpolation. Through this two-stage
design, UNet-MCSA focuses on structural reconstruction,
while UNet-NNI enhances large-gap clarity, forming a coherent methodological progression.
Although our method adopts architectures and techniques
originating from computer vision, the objective of inpainting multibeam backscatter intensity images is not limited to
achieving visually plausible results. Instead, the primary goal
is to ensure that the reconstructed data remain geophysically
consistent, meaning that the inpainted intensity values preserve
the scattering characteristics of the underlying seafloor and can
support downstream analyses, such as seabed classification,
habitat interpretation, and geological structure identification.
A. Intensity Image Inpainting Model Based on UNet-MCSA
The UNet architecture is a U-shaped convolutional neural
network structure that was proposed by Ronneberger et al.
[34]. Its unique skip-connection method captures the global

Authorized licensed use limited to: Fudan UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 13,2026 at 13:01:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HU et al.: UNet-NNI: A COLLABORATIVE INPAINTING METHOD

4202020

4202020

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 64, 2026

Fig. 2. UNet-MCSA model structure diagram.

Fig. 1. Overall structure diagram: it includes a ResNet block, UB, SB, and MCSA mechanism block.

semantic structure of images through upsampling and subsampling, enabling the inpainting of regions with varying amounts
of missing data. Enhancing information flow processing can
inpaint images from different scenarios. It can adapt to various
tasks by adding modules, enhancing its generalization capabilities. Compared with images from other scenarios, deep-sea
multibeam backscatter intensity images are characterized by
their simplicity (only grayscale images), data scarcity, and
unknown noise. In this context, the advantages of the UNet
architecture make it highly suitable for inpainting multibeam
backscatter intensity images.
As shown in Fig. 2, this study utilized the UNet structure
in combination with deep-sea multibeam backscatter intensity
data characteristics to propose a UNet-MCSA intensity image
inpainting model. This framework enhances the model’s learning ability for intensity images by adding residual modules
in the upsampling and subsampling layers. It also improves
the correlation and fluidity of features at different scales
by integrating SC modules and MCSA mechanism modules.
Assuming that the input image is X and the output image is
Y, the main steps are as follows.
1) Constructing the ResBlock: The ResBlock is the core
structure of the residual network (ResNet). It learns the

difference between the input X and the output H(X) through
the SC module, solving the degradation problem in deep
network training. The core idea is as follows:
H(X) = F(X) + X.

(1)

Among them, F(X) is the residual function to be learned by
the residual module, including the convolutional layer (Conv,
W3×3 is a 3 × 3 convolution kernel), the batch normalization
(BN) layer, and the activation function (ReLU), namely,
F(X) = ReLU(BN(W3×3 (X))).

(2)

Based on the above principles, this study designed a
double-layer convolution and constructed a residual module
fR through an SC using a 1 × 1 convolution kernel, namely,
fR = ReLU(BN(W3×3 · F(X)) + BN(W1×1 (X))).

(3)

2) Constructing the SB: The SB enhances global feature
perception capabilities by reducing the size of the feature space
and strengthening its receptive field structure. In this study, we
selected max pooling to construct the subsampling module fS
MP(i, j) = max0≤m,n<k x(s · i + m, s · j + n)
fS = fR (MP(X)).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Fudan UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 13,2026 at 13:01:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(4)
(5)

In the formula, i and j are feature image position indices; k
is the pooling window size (set as k = 2); m and n are pooling
window indices; and s is the step size (set as s = 2).
3) Constructing the UB: The UB reconstructs the original
image size from the compressed feature image to rebuild
its spatial resolution, ensuring that the output image size
matches the input size and enabling end-to-end prediction of
the inpainting model. In this study, we selected the bilinear
interpolation method based on the subsampled feature image
to construct the UB fU
BI(i, j) = f11 ·(x+1−i)(y+1− j)+ f21 ·( j− x)(y+1− j)
+ f12 · (x + 1 − i)( j − y) + f22 · (i − x)( j − y)
fU = fR (F(BI( fS ))).

(6)
(7)

In the formula, f11 , f21 , f12 , and f22 represent the pixel
values of the four neighboring integer coordinate points (x,
y), (x + 1, y), (x, y + 1), and (x + 1, y + 1) of the target point
(i, j).
Based on the features extracted by the SB and UB in the
corresponding dimensions, a skip-connection layer was constructed, i.e., the corresponding dimensions were concatenated
to obtain a new feature image Z
Z = [ fS ; fU ].

(8)

4) Constructing the MCSA Mechanism Block: The MCSA
block combines multiscale, channel, and spatial attention
mechanisms. By extracting information from feature images
at different scales, it uses the channel attention mechanism
to focus on “which features are important,” and the spatial attention mechanism to focus on “where the features
are important.” This approach adapts to the varying sizes

of skip-connected feature layers, covering local and global
information. Consequently, it effectively inpaints the structural complexity and varying textures of deep-sea multibeam
backscatter intensity images.
As shown in Fig. 3, the MCSA mechanism consists primarily of input feature layers, pooling layers, multiscale channel
attention layers, convolution layers, multiscale spatial attention
layers, and output feature layers.
a) Multiscale global average pooling: It is performed on
the feature layer using pooling kernels of different sizes (1×1,
2 × 2, 4 × 4) for CA1 , CA4 , and CA16 , and the pooling values
at different scales are flattened and concatenated for CA
CA1 = AvgPool1×1 (Z),

CA4 = AvgPool2×2 (Z)

CA16 = AvgPool4×4 (Z )
CA = [CA1 , CA4 , CA16 ].

(9)

b) Shared multilayer perceptron: Use the same fully
connected layer weights across multiple input positions to
perform feature transformations, enabling consistent data processing from different positions. This study first combined
the weight matrix w1 with the ReLU activation function to
perform 16-fold feature channel compression in the first layer.
Then, it combined the weight matrix w2 with the Sigmoid
activation function to inpaint the original feature channel
count, ultimately obtaining the weights AC for different feature
channels. Finally, the feature image was multiplied by the
corresponding weights to obtain the channel feature image Z 0
AC = Sigmoid(w2 · ReLU(w1 · CA))

(10)

Z =Z

(11)

0

AC .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Fudan UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 13,2026 at 13:01:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HU et al.: UNet-NNI: A COLLABORATIVE INPAINTING METHOD

4202020

4202020

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 64, 2026

c) As shown in Fig. 4, assign the pixel value of the nearest
point to the unknown point, i.e., b1 = a1.
2) Histogram Matching: Adjust the gray distribution of
one image to match the gray distribution of another reference image, making the two images visually more similar in
brightness or contrast characteristics.
a) Calculate the normalized histograms (p f , pg ) and cumulative distribution functions (T f , T g ) of the two images
separately, where g(x, y) represents the pixel points of the
inpainting image using the NNI method, and f (x, y) represents
the pixel points of the inpainting image using the UNet-MCSA
method

Fig. 3. Structural diagram of the MCSA mechanism.

f (x, y):p f (γk1 ) =
c) Multiscale convolution: Perform convolution on feature images using different convolution kernels (3 × 3, 5 × 5,
7 × 7) and different stride lengths (s = 1, 2, 4) for the
average layer convolution SA31 , SA52 , SA74 , then upscale the
convolved feature images and concatenate them by dimension
SA
SA31 = W3×3 (Z 0 ),

(12)

AS = Sigmoid(W1×1 (SA))

(13)

fM = Z

(14)

0

AS .

e) SC: Use a 1 × 1 convolution kernel and normalization
layer to reduce the number of feature image channels fZ so that
it matches the number of channels in the next jump connection
layer, ensuring a reasonable flow of feature dimensions
fZ = BN(W1×1 ( f M )).

(15)

5) Result Output: Through the above steps, combined with
the data flow method shown in Fig. 3 for training, the original
image channel number and size are finally inpainted through
a 1 × 1 convolution kernel and Sigmoid activation function to
obtain the predicted output image Y
Y = Sigmoid(W1×1 ( fZ )).

(16)

6) Loss Function: This study selected the mean square
error loss function, which calculates the square of all prediction errors and then takes the average to measure the gap
between the model’s predicted values and the actual values. It
has the advantages of being continuously differentiable, easy
to implement, and strongly penalizing of significant errors
1
MSE(X, Y) = ||Y − X||22 .
N

(17)

In the formula, N is the sample size and ||·||22 is the L2 norm.

k1
X

p f (γk1 )

j=0

T g (γk2 ) =

k2
X

Fig. 4. Schematic of NNI method.

pg (γk2 )

j=0

B. Histogram Alignment of Collaborative UNet-NNI
Inpainting Images
While inpainting multibeam backscatter intensity images
using the UNet-MCSA model, we found that its ability to fill in
gaps weakens as the gaps expand, resulting in blurred images
and loss of detail in the gap areas. However, conventional
interpolation methods do not rely on prior models, make few
assumptions about the data, and generally maintain consistency with the grayscale distribution of the original image,
but they do produce results with noticeable jagged edges and
a lack of smoothness in large missing regions.
Based on this, we combined the advantages of both methods. We leveraged the UNet-MCSA model’s ability to achieve
smooth transitions and eliminate jagged edges in the missing
regions of the intensity inpainting image, and we selected the
NNI method, which is widely used in interpolation techniques,
to maintain high similarity in the grayscale distribution during
intensity image inpainting. By combining these approaches,
we enhanced the clarity and detail of the inpainted image
through histogram matching.
1) NNI Method [21]: The pixel value at the target location
is set to the value of the nearest pixel point in the original
image.
a) Obtain the positions and corresponding pixel values
of known pixels in the original image corresponding to the
damaged image (DI), i.e., a1(x1, y1), a2(x2, y2), a3(x3, y3),
and a4(x4, y4), and obtain the unknown position b1(x0, y0) in
the DI.
b) Calculate the minimum distance between the unknown
and known pixel positions.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Fudan UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 13,2026 at 13:01:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(18)

In the formula, the number of pixels with gray levels γk1
and γk2 in the image is nk1 and nk2 , respectively, and N is the
total number of pixels.
b) Establish a mapping function to map the predicted image
gray value p f to the target gray value pg
T f (γk1 ) ≈ T g (γk2 ),
γk1 7→ γk2 ,

In the formula, Max is the maximum value of the image
pixels.
3) Structural Similarity Index Measure: Considering the
brightness, contrast, and structural information of the image,
this is an image similarity evaluation index that is closer to
human eye perception. The range is [−1, 1], and the closer the
value is to 1, the greater the similarity of the images
SSIM =

k1, k2 = 0, 1, . . . , L − 1.

SA74 = BI(W7×7 (Z 0 ))
d) Spatial attention image: Use a 1 × 1 convolution
kernel and Sigmoid activation function to perform convolution
on the concatenated feature image to obtain its spatial feature
weights. Multiply the channel weight image by the spatial
feature weights to obtain the spatial–channel feature image
fM

T f (γk1 ) =

nk 2
g(x, y):pg (γk2 ) =
,
N

SA52 = BI(W5×5 (Z 0 ))

SA = [SA31 ; SA52 ; SA74 ].

nk 1
,
N

2) Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio: It measures the ratio
between the maximum possible signal value and the noise in
an image. The higher the PSNR, the less distortion in the
image, and the better the inpainting
!
mn · Max2
PSNR = 10 · log10 Pm Pn
. (21)
2
i=1
j=1 (X(i, j) − Y(i, j))

|T f (γk1 ) − T g (γk2 )|min

γk1 , γk2 ∈ |0, L − 1|.

(19)

c) Apply the mapping function to generate the registered
image.
C. Accuracy Evaluation
Standard accuracy evaluation metrics for image inpainting
include the root mean square error (RMSE), peak signalto-noise ratio (PSNR), structural similarity index measure
(SSIM), and variance of the Laplacian (VL). These metrics
evaluate inpainting quality from the perspectives of error,
signal-to-noise ratio, structural fidelity, and clarity, respectively
[41]. This study used the RMSE, PSNR, and SSIM as absolute
metrics, and adopted VL as a relative metric to evaluate the
performance of the proposed method (UNet-NNI) relative to
that of other deep learning methods (AE and GAN) and
conventional interpolation methods (NNI, NaNI, LI, and CI)
in image inpainting tasks.
1) Root Mean Square Error: This is the square root of the
mean square error between pixels in two images (original and
inpainting images); a minor error indicates better inpainting
quality
v
u
m X
n
u 1 X
RMSE = t
(X(i, j) − Y(i, j))2 .
(20)
mn
i=1 j=1

In the formula, X(i, j) is the pixel value of the original
image, Y(i, j) is the pixel value of the inpainting image, and
m × n is the image size.

(2µX µY + C1 ) (2σXY + C2 )

.
µ2X + µ2Y + C1 σ2X + σ2Y + C2

(22)

In the formula, µX and µY represent the means of the original
image and the inpainting image, respectively; σX and σY
represent the variances of the original image and the inpainting
image, respectively; σXY represents the covariance between the
original image and the inpainting image; and C1 and C2 are
constants used to prevent the denominator becoming zero.
4) Variance of the Laplacian: This evaluates image clarity,
particularly to determine whether an image is blurry. It is a
reference-free image quality evaluation metric based on edge
information. The larger the VL, the clearer the image, and vice
versa. However, it is susceptible to noise. Therefore, this study
used it as a relative metric, taking the VL of the original image
as the standard, and calculating the distance VLD between the
VL of the inpainting image and the original image. A positive
value indicates improved image clarity, while a negative value
indicates reduced image clarity. In addition, an excessively
large VLD might indicate excessive noise in the image
L(i, j) = ∇2 I(i, j)
m
n
1 XX
VL =
(L(i, j) − θ)2
mn

(23)

VLD = VLX − VLY .

(25)

(24)

i=1 j=1

In the formula, I(i, j) is the grayscale image, ∇2 is the
Laplace operator, L(i, j) is the Laplace response of the image,
θ is the average value of the Laplace response, and VLX and
VLY are the VL values of the original image and inpainting
image, respectively.
III. R ESULTS
A. Experimental Data
This study utilized open-source multibeam backscatter
intensity images of the U.K.’s nearshore and surrounding
waters provided by the U.K. Geological Survey (see Fig. 5(a),
north–south direction: positive values represent north latitude,
negative values represent south latitude; east–west direction:
positive values represent east longitude, and negative values
represent west longitude), comprising 491 intensity images of
varying sizes. After screening and cropping, 5000 complete
intensity images of 128 × 128 pixels were obtained, as shown

Authorized licensed use limited to: Fudan UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 13,2026 at 13:01:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HU et al.: UNet-NNI: A COLLABORATIVE INPAINTING METHOD

4202020

4202020

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 64, 2026

TABLE I
ACCURACY I NDICATORS FOR E ACH M ETHOD

Fig. 5. Study area: (a) MBES survey scope in U.K. Coastal Sea. (b) Sample set. (c) Deep-sea multibeam backscatter intensity image. (c1) Central anomaly.
(c2) Unsurveyed. (c3) Data-intact.

in Fig. 5(b). Different-sized gaps were designed, including
rectangular and irregular gaps (unit: pixel size). The widths
of the rectangular gaps were 1, 5, 10, and 15. Irregular gaps
were created using superpixel segmentation, where random
segmentation regions are selected for nullification processing.
Ultimately, 25 000 sample groups were obtained, with 20 000
randomly selected as the training set and 5000 taken as the
test set to construct a multibeam backscatter intensity image
inpainting model.
In addition, to validate the model’s adaptability in deepsea regions, survey data were selected from a specific area in
the Pacific Ocean where the water depth ranges from 2000
to 5000 m, as shown in Fig. 5(c). The data were collected
in 2016 using an EM122 MBES and processed using Crais
8.0 software to obtain the multibeam backscatter intensity
image [see Fig. 5(c)]. The processed intensity image exhibited
severe central anomalies [see Fig. 5(c1)]. Owing to poor sea
conditions during the operation, the noise level near the bottom
transducer was very high, resulting in severe interference to the
echo intensity data. This led to mismeasurement and missing
data phenomena, manifested as rectangular and irregular gaps
in the intensity image [see Fig. 5(c2)]. In addition, we selected
a complete 128 × 128 region [see Fig. 5(c3)] in this image,
designed different null regions for it, and verified the effectiveness of our method proposed for deep-sea backscatter intensity
images. Moreover, we used the proposed model to complete
the entire region, forming a complete intensity image.
B. UNet-MCSA Test Results
This study employed the UNet-MCSA model construction
method, with the Adam optimizer, an initial learning rate
of 10−5 , a batch size of 32, and a total of 1000 training
iterations, with the model saved every 50 iterations. To validate
the superiority of the UNet-MCSA model in the task of
inpainting multibeam backscatter intensity images, this study
considered AE and GAN models for comparison (implementation details are referenced in [30] and [31], respectively).

The same training parameters and number of training epochs
were set for both additional models. Using a test set of 5000
groups, the average accuracy of the three models in inpainting
intensity images was calculated at different training epochs
using metrics such as the RMSE, PSNR, SSIM, and VLX for
image inpainting at different training iterations. Specifically,
when the training iteration reached 950, the UNet-MCSA
achieved the optimal absolute accuracy for image inpainting
(0.0152, 38.5288, 0.9270, 41.1649). In contrast, the AE and
GAN models achieved optimal accuracy at 1000 iterations
(0.0174, 36.8222, 0.9150, 5.3145) and 750 iterations (0.0183,
36.6668, 0.9130, 10.2256), respectively, achieving optimal
image inpainting accuracy.
For assessment from the perspective of deep-learning-based
image inpainting, we selected the inpainting results from the
optimal number of iterations of the three models for comparison (see Table I). In terms of absolute metrics, compared with
the AE model, UNet-MCSA improved the RMSE and SSIM
by 12.64% and 1.31%, respectively, and the PSNR improved
by 4.63%; compared with the GAN model, its RMSE and
SSIM improved by 16.94% and 1.53%, respectively, and the
PSNR improved by 5.08%. In terms of relative metrics, the
original VLY of the test set was 50.9280, while the VLX
of the UNet-MCSA model’s intensity inpainting image was
41.1649, with VLX values of 5.3145 and 10.2256 for the AE
and GAN models, respectively. The difference in VLD between
the UNet-MCSA-inpainting image and the original intensity
image was smaller, although the clarity was slightly reduced;
however, it still outperformed the other two models. From
the perspective of conventional interpolation-based image
inpainting, we selected four classic interpolation methods
(NNI, NaNI, LI, and CI) to compare their inpainting results.
Among them, the NNI method (0.0173, 37.6383, 0.9045)
showed improvements in the RMSE of 64.03%, 64.40%,
and 64.33%, respectively, and improvements in the SSIM of
0.24%, 0.93%, and 0.85%, respectively, compared with the
other three interpolation methods, and the PSNR improved
by 11.45%, 12.55%, and 12.22%, respectively. However, its

Authorized licensed use limited to: Fudan UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 13,2026 at 13:01:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

clarity and accuracy were notably lower than those of the other
three interpolation methods.
In addition, the NaNI, LI, and CI had excessively high
VLD values and low absolute metrics, which might have
been influenced by noise. Further analysis using visualized
inpainting images is required. Compared with the method
proposed in this study, its absolute metrics were lower than
those of UNet-MCSA, but its relative metrics were superior
to those of UNet-MCSA. The above results demonstrate the
superiority of the method proposed in this study for multibeam
backscatter intensity image inpainting tasks, highlighting the
advantages of conventional interpolation methods in predicting
the overall grayscale range of images.
Based on the above data analysis, the method proposed
in this study demonstrated evident advantages over the other
five methods in terms of the RMSE and PSNR when tested
on a dataset of 5000 groups. However, the improvement
in the SSIM was not particularly notable. To address this,
we conducted an analysis based on specific intensity image
inpainting results. For the same intensity image, we created
five DIs with different sizes of missing areas, named DI1
(rectangular damage, width = 1), DI2 (rectangular damage,
width = 5), DI3 (irregular damage, randomly divided), DI4
(rectangular damage, width = 10), and DI5 (rectangular damage, width = 15). We used a combination of grayscale images
and VL to demonstrate the clarity of the six inpainting methods, and residual images (RI1–5) to demonstrate inpainting
accuracy. We considered magnified color images [MI(a–f)] to
demonstrate the inpainting details. The experimental results
are shown in Figs. 6 and 7.
As can be seen from the figures, the results from the
six models exhibit marked similarity to the original image
in terms of brightness and contrast in the intensity image
inpainting, resulting in minimal SSIM differences. From the
inpainting results of DI1 and DI2, it is evident that the
RIs of the intensity inpainting images generated by UNetMCSA are nearly identical to those produced using the CI,
LI, and NaNI methods. The inpainting details of the color
images also overlap with the original images. The three
interpolation methods exhibit superior clarity compared with
UNet-MCSA. However, the AE and GAN models perform
poorly in terms of both the RIs and the inpainting details
for missing regions. In addition, the conventional interpolation
methods still demonstrate advantages in terms of inpainting of
small missing intensity images. From the inpainting results

of DI3, it can be seen that the RI, the inpainting detail
image, and the clarity metrics of the intensity inpainting
image of UNet-MCSA are superior to those of the other five
methods, while the inpainting residuals of the AE and GAN
models expand further. The three interpolation methods exhibit
“under-reconstruction” phenomena for irregular missing areas
in this DI, with the influence of under-reconstruction noise
leading to large VL values, validating the effectiveness of
the clarity evaluation metric designed in this study (to avoid
interference from noise) and highlighting the superiority of
UNet-MCSA in reconstructing irregular missing areas.
From the inpainting results of DI4 and DI5, it can be seen
that Unet-MCSA inpaints the details of intensity images and
reduces clarity, but exhibits overall superiority relative to the
other five methods. The inpainting errors of the AE and GAN
models continue to increase and the images become more
blurred. The three interpolation methods show unevenness and
jaggedness in the inpainting of images with large gaps, and
combined with DI3, they show a “leakage” phenomenon for
large gaps at the edges.
Overall, UNet-MCSA demonstrated certain advantages in
inpainting intensity images with varying degrees of damage
compared with the other deep learning image inpainting models and conventional interpolation methods. As the extent of
damage increases, the inpainting images’ residual values grow,
and image clarity decreases. The maximum residual values
for DI1–5 are 20, 25, 29, 30, and 42, respectively, and the
VLD values are −2.2687, −10.3115, −17.6697, −18.0156, and
−32.5100, respectively. Combining the results from Table I
and Figs. 6 and 7, it is evident that the multibeam backscatter intensity images exhibit different states depending on
the influence of varying multibeam system measurement
metrics and different marine environment scenarios. The
UNet-MCSA model’s learning process for inpainting is consequently impacted, resulting in insufficient capability to inpaint
details in large damaged areas. Meanwhile, the blurriness of
details affects the clarity of the inpainting image. Although the
NNI method was found to be at a disadvantage regarding the
absolute metrics for intensity image inpainting, its advantage
of not altering the pixel values themselves warrants further
investigation.
C. UNet-NNI Test Results
In the multibeam backscatter intensity image inpainting task, the UNet-MCSA model demonstrated a notable

Authorized licensed use limited to: Fudan UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 13,2026 at 13:01:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HU et al.: UNet-NNI: A COLLABORATIVE INPAINTING METHOD

4202020

4202020

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 64, 2026

Fig. 7. Inpainting results for DI4 and DI5.

Fig. 6. Inpainting results for DI1, DI2, and DI3.

advantage in terms of the absolute accuracy metrics. At the
same time, the NNI method showed a marked advantage
in terms of the relative accuracy metrics. To leverage the
strengths of both approaches, we calculated the RMSE and
histogram distance between each test intensity image and the
UNet-MCSA-inpainting image (as shown in Fig. 8(a) across

different intervals of damage severity [as shown in Fig. 8
(1)–(5)]), and the RMSE and histogram distance of the NNI
image [as shown in Fig. 8(b)], and the difference in the
RMSE and histogram distance between the two [as shown
in Fig. 8(c)]. As shown in the figure, the trends in the RMSE,
histogram distance, and NNI RMSE for UNet-MCSA are

Authorized licensed use limited to: Fudan UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 13,2026 at 13:01:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

consistent, while a certain number of outliers appear within
each damage interval [as shown in Fig. 8 (6)]. These outliers
correspond primarily to intensity images of lower quality
(blurred images and high noise levels) present in the test set.
Therefore, UNet-MCSA and the NNI method perform less
well when filling such objects. However, from the distribution
of the RMSE difference (NNI minus UNet-MCSA), shown in
Fig. 8(c), it can be observed that there are 3482 positive values,
1517 negative values, and 1 zero value. In addition, most
negative values fall within the range [−0.003, 0], indicating
that UNet-MCSA demonstrates superior inpainting capabilities
for intensity images across different scenes compared with the
NNI method.
However, the distribution trend of the histogram distance for
the NNI method shows a stepwise increase, and it is affected
relatively less by image quality. From the distribution of
the histogram distance difference (UNet-MCSA minus NNI),
presented in Fig. 8(c), it can be seen that there are 4191

positive values, 809 negative values, and zero values are 0,
indicating that the NNI method has a substantial advantage
over UNet-MCSA in predicting the gray-level distribution
in intensity-DIs. Thus, this study combined the respective
advantages of the two methods in intensity image inpainting
tasks, and it used the histogram matching method to construct
a complementary UNet-NNI model.
To this end, we further evaluated the inpainting accuracy
of the UNet-MCSA model, the NNI method, and the UNetNNI model in intensity images with different damage levels
using both absolute and relative metrics, and conducted an indepth analysis of the relationships among them. The results
are shown in Table II. The table shows that the UNet-MCSA
model outperforms the NNI Interpolation method in terms
of absolute metrics for intensity inpainting images, whether
analyzed from the perspective of the complete damage test
set (see Table I) or different damage set intervals. This
is particularly evident in DI3-type (irregular gaps) intensity

Authorized licensed use limited to: Fudan UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 13,2026 at 13:01:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HU et al.: UNet-NNI: A COLLABORATIVE INPAINTING METHOD

4202020

4202020

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 64, 2026

Fig. 8. (a) RMSE and histogram distances for UNet-MCSA, (b) RMSE and histogram distances for NNI, and (c) difference between UNet-MCSA and NNI
in RMSE and histogram distance.
TABLE II
ACCURACY I NDICATORS FOR D IFFERENT DAMAGE L EVELS U SING VARIOUS I NPAINTING M ETHODS

Fig. 9. Histogram registration results.

damage images, where the relative metrics decrease sharply
as the damage severity increases. However, the NNI
method maintains stable relative metrics (+6.3912, +6.4755,
+6.3778) in the inpainting of intensity images (DI2, DI4, and
DI5) with different damage types (rectangular gaps), without
significant changes as the gaps increase. Based on this, the
UNet-NNI model, which combines the two methods, performs
better than the NNI method in terms of absolute metrics (the
RMSE differences between the two are: −0.0035, −0.0013,

−0.0029, −0.0011, and −0.0012), and slightly weaker than
UNet-MCSA (the RMSE differences between the two are:
0.0002, 0.0000, 0.0002, 0.0003, and 0.0003); In terms of
relative metrics, the relative metrics for intensity images with
different damage levels (DI1-5) improved by 1.88%, 5.39%,
8.73%, 12.78%, and 25.12%, respectively, compared to UNetMCSA. Specifically, for DI3, the irregular gaps include both
small and large gaps. This validates the effectiveness of
UNet-NNI in enhancing the clarity of multibeam backscat-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Fudan UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 13,2026 at 13:01:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ter intensity inpainting images, particularly for inpainting
tasks involving large void damage intensity images, where
it significantly improves the relative metrics (clarity) of the
inpainting images while maintaining relatively small absolute
metrics.
In addition, we selected intensity damage images consistent
with Fig. 7 for specific demonstration and analysis. As shown
in Fig. 9, for the two types of damage images (DI4 and DI5),
the grayscale histogram distribution of the inpainting image
using the NNI method exhibits notable similarity with the
original image. However, the visual quality of the inpainting
image is similar to that of other interpolation methods, all
exhibiting noticeable jagged edges. The grayscale histogram
of the UNet-MCSA-inpainting image exhibits grayscale values
not present in the original image, leading to blurred inpainting
results in the missing areas. After histogram matching, the
clarity of the missing areas is improved substantially, with
enhancements of 9.4924 and 20.9868, respectively. However,
its detailed inpainting capability did not improve further. On
the one hand, this validates UNet-NNI’s ability to enhance
the clarity of inpainting images with large gaps. On the other
hand, as analyzed earlier, the inpainting capabilities of various
methods for intensity images are negatively correlated with the

size of the gaps and there are certain limitations. We analyze
this point further in the discussion using specific data.
D. UNet-NNI Validation Results
Based on the test results of the above models, we selected
noise-free regions in the deep-sea multibeam backscatter intensity image to design damaged regions for model generalization
validation. The results are listed in Table III. The table shows
that the UNet-MCSA model, NNI method, and UNet-NNI
model exhibit consistency with the test set regarding accuracy
metrics and intensity image inpainting results. Specifically,
the absolute metrics remain above the average value of the
test set, particularly for DIs of types DI1–3, where the
RMSE of both UNet-MCSA and UNet-NNI remain below
0.01, and the PSNR values exceed 40, demonstrating their
absolute advantage in inpainting intensity images of deep-sea
regions.
In addition, the relative metrics of the original images are
low, with a value of only 10.9712, indicating that the intensity
data quality measured by deep-sea multibeam systems is
poor, leading to low clarity in the resulting deep-sea intensity
images. Therefore, the clarity of the inpainting images also

Authorized licensed use limited to: Fudan UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 13,2026 at 13:01:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HU et al.: UNet-NNI: A COLLABORATIVE INPAINTING METHOD

4202020

4202020

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 64, 2026

TABLE III
ACCURACY I NDICATORS FOR D IFFERENT DAMAGE L EVELS U SING VARIOUS I NPAINTING M ETHODS

Fig. 11. Overall image of deep-sea multibeam backscatter intensity: (a) deep-sea multibeam backscatter DI and (b) deep-sea multibeam backscatter inpainting
image.

Fig. 10. Deep-sea intensity verification images inpainting results. (a) DI1. (b) DI2. (c) DI3. (d) DI4. (e) DI5.

remains low. However, after histogram matching, the intensity
inpainting images from UNet-NNI show certain improvement
compared with UNet-MCSA, with only a minimal difference in absolute accuracy, demonstrating the effectiveness of

combining the two methods in the deep-sea intensity image
inpainting task.
At the same time, we conducted a visual analysis of the
deep-sea multibeam scattering intensity images based on the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Fudan UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 13,2026 at 13:01:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

above accuracy assessment results. As shown in Fig. 10, the
color image represents the original intensity image, illustrating the distribution trend of intensity values (ranging from
−45.65 to −26.18 dB). The grayscale image is a grayscale
distribution image derived from the original intensity image
after normalization (with grayscale values ranging from 103
to 143), which is used as input for the intensity inpainting
model to assess the quality of the inpainting results. From the
perspective of the grayscale image, the clarity of the deepsea intensity image (10.9712) differs substantially from that of
the test image (75.9993), but its visual inpainting effect is no
weaker than that of the test image. From the perspective of the
intensity image, UNet-MCSA maintains a consistent intensity
distribution trend with the original image for intensity-DIs of
types DI1–4. However, for type-DI5 DIs, the inpainting results
in the feature regions exhibiting some deformation. The NNI
method still exhibits noticeable jagged edges in the inpainting
of large-gap intensity images (DI4 and 5). The quality of
UNet-NNI’s inpainting results depends on those of UNetMCSA (positive correlation), with the primary objective being
to enhance the clarity of UNet-MCSA’s inpainting images.
Therefore, in inpainting deep-sea multibeam backscatter
intensity images, we need to select appropriate inpainting
methods based on the extent of image damage and the specific
application scenario, ensuring that the inpainting images maintain the highest possible absolute accuracy while aligning with
visual changes. To this end, we applied median filtering. We
removed the central outlier region from the noise in the deepsea backscatter intensity data shown in Fig. 5(c), resulting
in the damaged grayscale image depicted in Fig. 11(a). We
then used UNet-MCSA to inpaint the intensity images of the
deep-sea multibeam acquisition area and employed UNet-NNI
to enhance the clarity of the inpainting. The results, shown
in Fig. 11(b), demonstrate that the method proposed in this
study can balance inpainting accuracy, texture continuity, and
edge smoothness when handling damaged regions in deepsea multibeam backscatter intensity images. It is suitable for
addressing strip-like missing data and mixed noise issues,
substantially improving image quality and readability while
preserving the original structural features of the image.
In addition to visual inspection, we calculated the correlation coefficient between the image and its spatially shifted
versions to compare the intensity of spatial autocorrelation

Fig. 12. Spatial autocorrelation curve. The original image corresponds to
the grayscale version in Fig. 5(c), the DI corresponds to Fig. 11(a), and the
inpainting image corresponds to Fig. 11(b).

[42] at different distances. The variation in the correlation
coefficient is illustrated in Fig. 12. The spatial autocorrelation
curves of the original, damaged, and inpainting images reveal
clear differences in texture continuity and structural coherence.
The original image exhibits a typical decay pattern, with high
autocorrelation at small spatial lags and gradual reduction as
the lag increases, reflecting the inherent large-scale continuity
of seafloor backscatter textures. The DI shows consistently
lower autocorrelation across all lag distances, indicating disrupted spatial dependency and the loss of natural seabed
texture structure.
In contrast, the inpainting result demonstrates higher autocorrelation than both the original and the DIs over most
lag ranges. It suggests that the proposed method effectively
inpaints the spatial continuity of the missing regions and
reconstructs coherent acoustic textures. The curve of the
inpainting image closely follows the expected decay trend
of real backscatter data, confirming that the reconstructed
patterns are physically plausible and consistent with natural
seafloor texture characteristics. Overall, the spatial autocorrelation analysis provides semiquantitative validation of the
effectiveness of the proposed inpainting method on real data,
complementing visual inspection in scenarios where groundtruth data are unavailable.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Fudan UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 13,2026 at 13:01:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HU et al.: UNet-NNI: A COLLABORATIVE INPAINTING METHOD

IV. D ISCUSSION
A. Rationale for Model Selection
In this study, multiple comparative methods—including AE,
GAN, and several classical interpolation techniques—were
incorporated to ensure comprehensive evaluation of the proposed inpainting framework. For clarity, we discuss their
characteristics and the rationale for selecting them as comparison models.
The AE model reconstructs images by compressing them
into a latent space and decoding them back to the original
resolution. It is capable of inpainting coarse global structure
but often fails to recover fine textures owing to limited spatial
modeling capacity. The GAN method introduces adversarial
learning to enhance visual realism. However, it tends to
be sensitive to noise and might generate artifacts in large
or irregular gaps. Therefore, the AE and GAN models are
representative examples of generative inpainting approaches,
serving as an effective comparison for evaluating our method’s
structural fidelity and detail generation.
In contrast, interpolation-based methods (i.e., NNI, NaNI,
LI, and CI) represent traditional and widely used tools in
multibeam backscatter preprocessing. These methods do not
rely on training data and preserve the original gray-level
distribution, but they generally perform poorly in large missing
areas, either because of jagged edges or excessive smoothing.
These methods offer a reference for evaluating the gray-level
consistency of inpainting images.
UNet’s encoder–decoder structure with skip connections
provides a balance between hierarchical semantic abstraction
and the preservation of local texture cues—two properties that
are highly relevant to multibeam backscatter intensity images,
which contain gradual texture transitions and often suffer from
irregular noise. Compared with the AE and GAN models,
UNet offers three notable advantages for this particular task.
1) Its multiscale representation allows the model to handle
gaps of varying sizes more effectively.
2) Skip connections help retain shallow structural information necessary for reconstructing seabed textures.
3) UNet demonstrates greater robustness to noise, which
is especially important in deep-sea environments where
acoustic uncertainty is high.
Our experiments also showed that under identical training settings, UNet exhibited lower reconstruction error and
higher structural similarity than the AE and GAN models.
These observations justify the focus on UNet-based inpainting.
Moreover, the integration of the MCSA mechanism and the
collaborative histogram registration strategy further enhances
UNet’s adaptability to complex damage patterns, providing
a more stable and physically consistent reconstruction of
backscatter data.
B. Exploration of the Limits of the Inpainting Models
Through analysis of the accuracy results of the above test
set and validation set, it was found that both the joint UNetNNI image inpainting method proposed in this study and the
conventional inpainting methods have marked advantages in

4202020

maintaining image grayscale consistency and reconstruction
structural accuracy. However, their inpainting capabilities still
have limitations for large-area, irregular image defects. To
address this, we investigated the inpainting model accuracy
with different rectangular damage widths and irregular damage
intensities. Fig. 12 shows the image inpainting performance
of the five methods (i.e., the AE, GAN, NNI, UNet-NNI,
and UNet-MCSA methods) under different rectangular damage
width conditions (pixel damage width range: 1–25), with the
evaluation metrics of the RMSE, PSNR, SSIM, and image
clarity metric (VLX ). Overall, the proposed UNet-MCSA and
UNet-NNI outperform the other traditional methods in terms
of all metrics.
Regarding the RMSE [see Fig. 13(a)], as the damage width
increases, the overall error of all methods rises, reflecting
the substantial impact of expanded damage area on image
inpainting accuracy. UNet-MCSA consistently maintains the
lowest error value, indicating its strong image reconstruction capability, even in complex damage scenarios. However,
the AE method exhibits instability in small-area damage,
with notable RMSE fluctuations suggesting a lack of practical spatial structural constraints. Regarding the PSNR [see
Fig. 13(b)], its changes further illustrate the image inpainting
quality of each method. UNet-MCSA achieves the highest
PSNR values across the entire damage width range, with its
advantage becoming more pronounced when the damage width
exceeds 10. UNet-NNI follows closely behind, indicating that
the combination of the UNet architecture and NNI method
demonstrates excellent performance in compressing image
noise and inpainting details.
Regarding the SSIM [see Fig. 13(c)], UNet-MCSA and
UNet-NNI maintain higher structural consistency, demonstrating good edge preservation and texture continuity, strongly
outperforming the GAN and NNI methods. The AE method
exhibits structural collapse in certain intervals, resulting in a
rapid decline in the SSIM. Regarding the clarity VL metrics [see Fig. 13(d)], UNet-NNI maintains the highest VL
values across most damaged widths, reflecting its greater
ability to preserve local gradient changes and edge information in images. Although UNet-MCSA’s clarity is slightly
lower than that of UNet-NNI, it remains within visually
acceptable ranges and offers advantages in overall quality
metrics.
Although the proposed models achieve notable improvements in RMSE and PSNR, the enhancement in SSIM remains
relatively modest. This phenomenon can be attributed to
the inherent properties of the SSIM, which places substantial emphasis on local luminance and contrast consistency.
In multibeam backscatter data, local intensity variations are
often dominated by acoustic noise, grazing-angle effects, and
seafloor roughness fluctuations rather than by purely structural
differences. Consequently, even when the global structure and
gap transitions are substantially improved, the residual local
intensity inconsistencies induced by uncontrollable noise can
suppress the overall SSIM gain. This highlights an intrinsic
limitation of the SSIM when evaluating data in which smallscale fluctuations are not purely structural but are physically
meaningful or noise-driven.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Fudan UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 13,2026 at 13:01:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4202020

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 64, 2026

Fig. 13. Accuracy variation chart of different rectangular damage intensity images: (a) RMSE, (b) PSNR, (c) SSIM, and (d) VLX .

Fig. 14. Accuracy variation chart of irregular damage intensity images: (a) RMSE and VL and (b) SSIM and PSNR.

In contrast, the VL metric demonstrates high sensitivity
to noise because it directly reflects the local intensity dispersion within a neighborhood window. Backscatter intensity
images inherently exhibit high-frequency randomness caused
by speckle-like noise, incident-angle variability, and sediment
heterogeneity. Models that effectively reconstruct the seafloor
structure might still introduce slight deviations in local variance, leading to noticeable fluctuations in VL. This sensitivity
does not necessarily indicate poor inpainting quality, but
rather underscores the metric’s responsiveness to microscale
variations.

From a practical perspective, these findings have important
implications. First, the limited SSIM improvement suggests
that relying solely on structure-oriented metrics might lead to
underestimation of the effectiveness of inpainting methods that
prioritize geophysical consistency over pixel-level smoothness.
Second, the sensitivity of VL indicates that methods aiming to
minimize local variance might inadvertently oversmooth physically meaningful seabed textures, potentially compromising
subsequent geological or habitat interpretations.
Fig. 14 shows the overall performance of each method
on irregular DIs. As can be seen from the figure, UNet-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Fudan UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 13,2026 at 13:01:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HU et al.: UNet-NNI: A COLLABORATIVE INPAINTING METHOD

MCSA performs best in terms of comprehensive performance
metrics such as the RMSE, PSNR, and SSIM, while also
demonstrating high image inpainting quality and structural
preservation capabilities. UNet-NNI continues to demonstrate
its outstanding clarity performance. In contrast, the GAN and
AE methods appear relatively weak when handling irregular
damage structures, with inpainting results prone to blurring
and texture errors.
By analyzing the changes in accuracy and combining the
abovementioned intensity inpainting image, it can be seen
that although UNet-MCSA and UNet-NNI perform well under
conventional damage conditions, the trend curves of the different metrics show that when the damage width exceeds
a certain threshold (approximately 18 pixels), the model’s
inpainting performance decreases substantially, indicating that
the current method has limitations when dealing with largescale information loss. The RMSE curve shows a sharp
increase when the damage width reaches approximately 20
pixels, while the PSNR and SSIM decline rapidly, reflecting
the model’s difficulty in accurately reconstructing the original
image structure in large missing areas.
This performance decline stems primarily from the model’s
reliance on contextual information for feature reconstruction.
When the local missing area is large, the spatial structural
information and grayscale distribution in the original image
are severely disrupted, making it challenging for deep learning
models to perform practical inference. In addition, the image
clarity metrics reveal another boundary of inpainting capability. While UNet-NNI maintains relatively high gradient values
under severe damage conditions, its interpolation strategy leads
to excessive edge sharpening and local artifacts, impairing
overall visual perception. UNet-MCSA can retain relatively
rich structural information through multiscale feature fusion.
However, in regions lacking strong prior information, it still
struggles to accurately inpaint local details, leading to smooth
or blurred image edges.
The results of the irregular DI, shown in Fig. 14, further illustrate the model’s generalization issues. For regions
with unclear boundaries, blurred contours, or discontinuous structures, the model’s discrimination and reconstruction
capabilities decline, especially in areas where damage of
different scales overlaps, often resulting in texture distortion
and grayscale drift. These phenomena highlight the current
model’s limitations in practical applications, particularly in
deep-sea scenarios with high noise backgrounds and marked
terrain complexity, where its stability and accuracy still require
improvement. To further push the boundaries of image inpainting, as deep-sea measurement coverage expands and more
technologies are applied to deep-sea seabed image research,
future studies in deep-sea image inpainting should explore the
following directions.
1) Incorporating a Priori Knowledge of Seabed Topography: Combining auxiliary features such as water depth, slope,
and seabed composition to constrain the model’s structural
generation process.
2) Multimodal Information Fusion: Jointly learning acoustic imagery with optical, synthetic aperture radar (SAR), and

4202020

4202020

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 64, 2026

other remote sensing data to enhance the model’s understanding and reconstruction capabilities for complex images.
3) Reinforcement Learning or Self-Supervised Mechanisms:
Utilizing unsupervised or pseudo-label mechanisms to enhance
the model’s stability and generalization under the condition of
large-scale missing data.
C. Ablation Experiment
To validate the impact of the MCSA mechanism on the
UNet model inpainting architecture, we designed the ablation
experiments shown in Fig. 15, which demonstrate the changes
in accuracy performance of the AE, GAN, UNet, and UNetMCSA models during the training process from 1 to 1000
iterations (with models saved every 50 iterations). From the
trends in the various accuracy metrics and the final values
at the stable stage, it is evident that the UNet-MCSA model
outperforms the other three models in terms of training convergence and inpainting accuracy, particularly demonstrating a
notable advantage in enhancing image structural preservation
and detail clarity.
The RMSE metric in Fig. 15(a) indicates that UNetMCSA converges rapidly after approximately 200 iterations
and maintains a low error level (as low as 0.0151), notably
outperforming the UNet (0.0179) and GAN (0.0192) models,
while the AE model exhibits the highest overall error and
poorest convergence performance. The PSNR metric [see
Fig. 15(b)] also reflects the superiority of UNet-MCSA in
terms of reconstruction quality, with a stable value of around
38.6, far exceeding that of UNet (approximately 36.7) and
the other models, indicating that this method demonstrates
stronger performance in visual fidelity. From the structural
similarity analysis [see Fig. 15(c)], UNet-MCSA’s SSIM is
stable at around 0.9291, which is a substantial improvement
over that of the UNet (0.9102) and GAN (0.9004) models,
indicating that the MCSA mechanism is effective in maintaining image structural consistency. In terms of the image clarity
metric VLX [see Fig. 15(d)], UNet-MCSA remains stable at
around 36.75, slightly outperforming the UNet and AE models,
and far outperforming the rapid decline trend of the GAN
model after its initial peak, indicating that UNet-MCSA is
more stable and effective in enhancing image detail levels.
Overall, the improvement in the performance of UNetMCSA relative to that of UNet can be regarded as a direct
benefit of the MCSA mechanism. This module dynamically
adjusts the weights of feature channels and spatial positions
without markedly increasing model complexity, enabling the
network to focus more on the contextual semantic relationships
of the damaged area and thereby improving the inpainting
quality of the inpainting area. In addition, the attention
mechanism effectively enhances the fusion capability between
multiscale features, making the model more adaptive and
robust, and particularly suitable for image inpainting tasks in
areas of complex deep-sea terrain. UNet-MCSA achieves the
best training accuracy across all metrics, converges quickly,
and maintains numerical stability, fully demonstrating the
effectiveness and advanced nature of the proposed module.
These experiments serve as ablation validation support for the
structural design optimization of the proposed method, further

Authorized licensed use limited to: Fudan UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 13,2026 at 13:01:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 15. Accuracy training accuracy variation chart for different inpainting models: (a) RMSE, (b) PSNR, (c) SSIM, and (d) VLX .

reinforcing the proposed model’s theoretical and engineering
application value.
V. C ONCLUSION
This study addressed the problem of reconstruction of deepsea multibeam backscatter intensity images in the presence of
large-scale damage, and proposed a joint UNet-NNI image
inpainting method. The derived conclusions are as follows.
1) In terms of the model, UNet is used as the backbone
network, integrated with an SC structure and the MCSA
mechanism, to construct the UNet-MCSA image inpainting model, which balances global feature extraction
and local texture representation capabilities. This model
effectively enhances the collaborative modeling capabilities of multiscale features and improves the network’s
performance in inpainting complex structural damage
regions. Combining the advantages of the NNI algorithm in preserving the original grayscale distribution,
the inpainting results are histogram-aligned with the
UNet output, effectively improving the image clarity and
structural consistency of large-area damaged regions.
2) In terms of experiments, this study constructed a
training dataset based on publicly available multibeam
backscatter intensity image data from the British Geological Survey (BGS), and it used a small number of
authentic deep-sea images for testing and validation.

Through comparative experiments on images with different damage widths and irregular defects, the proposed
UNet-MCSA and UNet-NNI were shown to outperform
traditional methods and baseline networks in terms of
the RMSE, PSNR, SSIM, and image clarity metrics,
validating the comprehensive advantages of the proposed
method in terms of image inpainting accuracy, clarity,
and structural preservation. In addition, the proposed
model was used to inpaint damaged deep-sea multibeam
backscatter intensity images.
3) The inpainting limits of the model in extreme damage scenarios were also explored, providing insights
and methodological support for future acoustic image
reconstruction in complex deep-sea environments. In
future research, we aim to incorporate a pr knowledge
of seabed topography, multimodal information fusion,
reinforcement learning, or self-supervised mechanisms
to enhance further the inpainting accuracy and visual
quality of deep-sea backscatter intensity images. In
addition, ablation experiments were designed to validate
the effectiveness of the MCSA mechanism in improving
model accuracy.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors want to thank British Geological Survey (BGS)
for providing the multibeam dataset and ground-truth samples.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Fudan UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 13,2026 at 13:01:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HU et al.: UNet-NNI: A COLLABORATIVE INPAINTING METHOD

R EFERENCES
[1]

D. E. LaScala-Gruenewald et al., “Building on a human-centred, iterative, and agile co-design strategy to facilitate the availability of deep
ocean data,” ICES J. Mar. Sci., vol. 80, no. 2, pp. 347–351, Mar. 2023,
doi: 10.1093/icesjms/fsac145.
[2] J. Koslow, “Continental slope and deep-sea Fisheries: Implications for a
fragile ecosystem,” ICES J. Mar. Sci., vol. 57, no. 3, pp. 548–557, Jun.
2000, doi: 10.1006/jmsc.2000.0722.
[3] J. Griny´o et al., “Megafaunal assemblages in deep-sea ecosystems
of the Gulf of cadiz, northeast Atlantic Ocean,” Deep Sea Res. I,
Oceanographic Res. Papers, vol. 183, May 2022, Art. no. 103738, doi:
10.1016/j.dsr.2022.103738.
[4] T. Yoshida, M. Kawato, Y. Fujiwara, Y. Nagano, S. Tsuchida, and
A. Yabuki, “Optimization of environmental DNA analysis using pumped
deep-sea water for the monitoring of fish biodiversity,” Frontiers Mar.
Sci., vol. 9, Jan. 2023, Art. no. 965800, doi: 10.3389/fmars.2022.965800.
[5] W. Ma, K. Zhang, Y. Du, X. Liu, and Y. Shen, “Status of sustainability
development of deep-sea mining activities,” J. Mar. Sci. Eng., vol. 10,
no. 10, p. 1508, Oct. 2022, doi: 10.3390/jmse10101508.
[6] S. Vadakkepuliyambatta, P. Roy, B. S. Ingole, K. A. K. Raju, P. J. Kurian,
and T. Meloth, “Potential of deep-sea mineral resources for the blue
economy,” Current Sci., vol. 126, no. 2, pp. 192–199, Jan. 2024, doi:
10.18520/cs/v126/i2/192-199.
[7] X. Bu, S. Mei, F. Yang, Z. Luan, F. Xu, and Y. Luo, “A precise
method to calibrate dynamic integration errors in shallow{-} and deepwater multibeam bathymetric data,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 4202914, doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2021.3097723.
[8] X. Shang, J. Zhao, and H. Zhang, “Obtaining high-resolution seabed
topography and surface details by co-registration of side-scan sonar
and multibeam echo sounder images,” Remote Sens., vol. 11, no. 12,
p. 1496, Jun. 2019, doi: 10.3390/rs11121496.
[9] B. Wei, H. Li, T. Zhou, and S. Xing, “Obtaining 3D high-resolution
underwater acoustic images by synthesizing virtual aperture on the 2D
transducer array of multibeam echo sounder,” Remote Sens., vol. 11,
no. 22, p. 2615, Nov. 2019, doi: 10.3390/rs11222615.
[10] A. C. G. Schimel, C. J. Brown, and D. Ierodiaconou, “Automated
filtering of multibeam water-column data to detect relative abundance of
giant kelp (macrocystis pyrifera),” Remote Sens., vol. 12, no. 9, p. 1371,
Apr. 2020, doi: 10.3390/rs12091371.
[11] K. Czechowska et al., “Testing side-scan sonar and multibeam
echosounder to study black coral gardens: A case study from
macaronesia,” Remote Sens., vol. 12, no. 19, p. 3244, Oct. 2020, doi:
10.3390/rs12193244.
[12] F. Mosca et al., “Scientific potential of a new 3D multibeam
echosounder in Fisheries and ecosystem research,” Fisheries Res.,
vol. 178, pp. 130–141, Jun. 2016, doi: 10.1016/j.fishres.2015.10.017.
[13] G. Fromant, N. Le Dantec, Y. Perrot, F. Floc’h, A. LebourgesDhaussy, and C. Delacourt, “Suspended sediment concentration
field quantified from a calibrated MultiBeam EchoSounder,”
Appl. Acoust., vol. 180, Sep. 2021, Art. no. 108107, doi:
10.1016/j.apacoust.2021.108107.
[14] J. Zhao, D. Mai, H. Zhang, and S. Wang, “Automatic detection and
segmentation on gas plumes from multibeam water column images,”
Remote Sens., vol. 12, no. 18, p. 3085, Sep. 2020, doi: 10.3390/
rs12183085.
[15] Q.-H. Tang, X.-H. Zhou, Z.-C. Liu, and A. D.-W. Du, “Processing
multibeam backscatter data,” Mar. Geodesy, vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 251–258,
Jul. 2005, doi: 10.1080/01490410500204595.
[16] A. C. G. Schimel et al., “Multibeam sonar backscatter data processing,”
Mar. Geophys. Res., vol. 39, nos. 1–2, pp. 121–137, Jun. 2018, doi:
10.1007/s11001-018-9341-z.
[17] H. Ma, X. Lai, T. Hu, X. Fu, X. Zhang, and S. Song, “Seafloor
sediment classification using small-sample multi-beam data based on
convolutional neural networks,” J. Mar. Sci. Eng., vol. 13, no. 4, p. 671,
Mar. 2025, doi: 10.3390/jmse13040671.
[18] X. Shang, L. Dong, and J. Zhao, “Optimal scale determination for objectbased backscatter image analysis in seafloor substrate classification
based on classification uncertainty,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett.,
vol. 21, pp. 1–5, 2024, doi: 10.1109/LGRS.2024.3352086.
[19] V. Lucieer, M. Roche, K. Degrendele, M. Malik, M. Dolan, and
G. Lamarche, “User expectations for multibeam echo sounders backscatter strength data-looking back into the future,” Mar. Geophys. Res.,
vol. 39, nos. 1–2, pp. 23–40, Jun. 2018, doi: 10.1007/s11001-017-93165.

4202020

ˇ
[20] T. Zhao, G. M. Gavazzi, S. Lazendi´c, Y. Zhao, and A. Pizurica,
“Acoustic seafloor classification using the weyl transform of multibeam
echosounder backscatter mosaic,” Remote Sens., vol. 13, no. 9, p. 1760,
May 2021, doi: 10.3390/rs13091760.
[21] M. B. Hisham, S. N. Yaakob, R. A. A. Raof, A. B. A. Nazren,
and N. M. Wafi, “An analysis of performance for commonly used
interpolation method,” Adv. Sci. Lett., vol. 23, no. 6, pp. 5147–5150,
Jun. 2017, doi: 10.1166/asl.2017.7329.
[22] X. Zhang, D. Zhai, T. Li, Y. Zhou, and Y. Lin, “Image inpainting based
on deep learning: A review,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 90, pp. 74–94, Feb. 2023,
doi: 10.1016/j.inffus.2022.08.033.
[23] H. Luo and Y. Zheng, “Survey of research on image inpainting methods,”
J. Frontiers Comput. Sci. Technol., vol. 16, no. 10, pp. 2193–2218, Oct.
2022, doi: 10.3778/j.issn.1673-9418.2204101.
[24] J. Li and B. Koo, “Application of U-Net remote sensing data in
ecological landscape restoration planning and pollution prevention,” Int.
J. Environ. Pollut., vol. 75, no. 1, pp. 1–20, Dec. 2024, doi: 10.1504/
ijep.2024.10068510.
[25] H. Wang et al., “Spatio-temporal reconstruction to fill spatial gaps
in global satellite vegetation optical depth products,” Remote Sens.
Environ., vol. 325, Aug. 2025, Art. no. 114787, doi: 10.1016/
j.rse.2025.114787.
[26] K. Liu, X. Wang, Y. Xie, and J. Hu, “Edge-guided GAN: A depth image
inpainting approach guided by edge information,” J. Image Graph.,
vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 186–197, Jan. 2021, doi: 10.11834/jig.200509.
[27] S. Moriyama, K. Ichige, Y. Hori, and M. Tachi, “Video reflection
removal by modified EDVR and 3D convolution,” IEICE Trans.
Fundamentals Electron., Commun. Comput. Sci., vol. 107, no. 8,
pp. 1430–1434, Aug. 2024, doi: 10.1587/transfun.2023eal2078.
[28] H. C. Anandharaj, R. Hephzibah, G. Kowsalya, R. Jayanthi,
and D. A. Chandy, “Review on deep learning methodologies
in medical image restoration and segmentation,” Current
Med. Imag., vol. 19, no. 8, pp. 844–854, Jul. 2023, doi:
10.2174/1573405618666220407112825.
[29] P. Ge et al., “Enhancing trabecular CT scans based on deep learning with
multi-strategy fusion,” Computerized Med. Imag. Graph., vol. 116, Sep.
2024, Art. no. 102410, doi: 10.1016/j.compmedimag.2024.102410.
[30] L. Yu, Y. Gao, F. Pakdaman, and M. Gabbouj, “Panoramic image
inpainting with gated convolution and contextual reconstruction
loss,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process.
(ICASSP), Seoul, South Korea, Apr. 2024, pp. 4255–4259, doi: 10.1109/
ICASSP48485.2024.10446469.
[31] G. Wang, P. Wang, Z. Chen, W. Wang, C. C. Loy, and Z. Liu, “PERF:
Panoramic neural radiance field from a single panorama,” IEEE Trans.
Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 46, no. 10, pp. 6905–6918, Oct. 2024,
doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2024.3387307.
[32] H. Zhang, C. Liu, N. Inoue, and K. Shinoda, “Multi-task autoencoder
for noise-robust speech recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust.,
Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP), Apr. 2018, pp. 5599–5603, doi:
10.1109/ICASSP.2018.8461446.
[33] A. Creswell, T. White, V. Dumoulin, K. Arulkumaran, B. Sengupta,
and A. A. Bharath, “Generative adversarial networks: An overview,”
IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 53–65, Jan. 2018, doi:
10.1109/MSP.2017.2765202.
[34] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox, “U-Net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image segmentation,” in Proc. MICCAI, Munich,
Germany, 2015, pp. 234–241, doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-24574-4 28.
[35] W. Yu, S. Heber, and T. Pock, “Learning reaction-diffusion models
for image inpainting,” in Proc. 37th GCPR, Aachen, Germany, 2015,
pp. 356–367, doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-24947-6 29.
[36] W. Quan, J. Chen, Y. Liu, D.-M. Yan, and P. Wonka, “Deep learningbased image and video inpainting: A survey,” Int. J. Comput. Vis.,
vol. 132, no. 7, pp. 2367–2400, Jul. 2024, doi: 10.1007/s11263-02301977-6.
[37] L. Chen, L. Zhou, L. Li, and M. Luo, “CrackDiffusion: Crack inpainting
with denoising diffusion models and crack segmentation perceptual
score,” Smart Mater. Struct., vol. 32, no. 5, May 2023, Art. no. 054001,
doi: 10.1088/1361-665x/acc624.
[38] Z. Wang, X. Jiang, C. Chen, and Y. Li, “Lightweight multi-scales feature
diffusion for image inpainting towards underwater fish monitoring,”
J. Mar. Sci. Eng., vol. 12, no. 12, p. 2178, Nov. 2024, doi: 10.3390/
jmse12122178.
[39] C. Zhang, W. Yang, X. Li, and H. Han, “MMGInpainting: Multimodality guided image inpainting based on diffusion models,” IEEE
Trans. Multimedia, vol. 26, pp. 8811–8823, 2024, doi: 10.1109/
TMM.2024.3382484.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Fudan UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 13,2026 at 13:01:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4202020

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 64, 2026

[40] W. Zhang, X. Zhang, J. Dong, X. Song, and R. Pang, “CIDM: A
comprehensive inpainting diffusion model for missing weather radar
data with knowledge guidance,” ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens.,
vol. 221, pp. 299–309, Mar. 2025, doi: 10.1016/j.isprsjprs.2025.02.001.
[41] H.-A. Li, L. Hu, J. Liu, J. Zhang, and T. Ma, “A review of advances in
image inpainting research,” Imag. Sci. J., vol. 72, no. 5, pp. 669–691,
Jul. 2024, doi: 10.1080/13682199.2023.2212572.
[42] Q. Du, Y. Pan, K. Zhao, and D. Gao, “Research examining a spatial
autocorrelation imaging method based on stationary characteristics of
microtremors,” Frontiers Phys., vol. 12, Feb. 2024, Art. no. 1351018,
doi: 10.3389/fphy.2024.1351018.

Haiyang Hu received the M.S. degree from
Shandong University of Science and Technology,
Qingdao, China, in 2024. He is currently pursuing
the Ph.D. degree with the College of Underwater
Acoustic Engineering, Harbin Engineering University, Harbin, China.
His research interests include acoustic seabed
sediment classification and mapping of deep-sea
habitats.

Ziyin Wu received the M.S. degree from the Second
Institute of Oceanography, State Oceanic Administration, Hangzhou, China, in 2001, and the Ph.D.
degree in marine geology from Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou, in 2008.
He is currently a Professor with the College
of Underwater Acoustic Engineering, Harbin Engineering University, Harbin, China, and the State
Key Laboratory of Submarine Geoscience, Second Institute of Oceanography, Ministry of Natural
Resources, Hangzhou. His primary research interests
include seabed survey and information systems.

Mingwei Wang received the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees
from the College of Geodesy and Geomatics,
Shandong University of Science and Technology,
Qingdao, China, in 2017 and 2021, respectively.
He is currently an Assistant Professor with the
State Key Laboratory of Submarine Geoscience,
Second Institute of Oceanography, Ministry of Natural Resources, Hangzhou, China. His research
interests include the application of deep learning
in underwater acoustic data processing and highresolution submarine topography detection.

Tian Zhou received the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in
underwater acoustic signal processing from Harbin
Engineering University, Harbin, China, in 2003 and
2006, respectively.
He is currently a Professor with the College
of Underwater Acoustic Engineering, Harbin Engineering University. His research interests include
high-frequency sonar design, bathymetric surveys,
and sonar image processing.

Fanlin Yang received the Ph.D. degree from Wuhan
University, Wuhan, Hubei, China, in 2003.
He is currently a Professor with the College of
Geomatics, Shandong University of Science and
Technology, Qingdao, China. His research interests
include bathymetry survey and marine navigation.

Jianbing Chen received the B.E. degree from Shandong Agricultural University, Taian, China, in 2018,
and the M.S. degree from Shandong University of
Science and Technology, Qingdao, China, in 2021,
where he is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with
the College of Geodesy and Geomatics.
His research interests include seabed topography
detection and deep learning.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Fudan UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 13,2026 at 13:01:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

