IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 64, 2026

5601115

A Dual-Stream UNet With Parallel Channel–Spatial
Interaction and Aggregation for Change Detection
Chaoyu Zhang , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Qiuze Yu , Yanli Shang , Fanghong Liu ,
and Haowen Zhang , Graduate Student Member, IEEE

Abstract—Change detection (CD) aims to analyze changes in
objects between bitemporal images, playing a crucial role in
geographical observations. However, hidden difference features
and insufficient interfeature interaction both lead to suboptimal
performance of methods. To address these challenges, this article
proposes a dual-stream UNet with parallel channel–spatial interaction and aggregation (DCSI-UNet). First, the encoding part
utilizes a multilayer dual-stream convolutional neural network
(CNN) to extract multilayer features of bitemporal images and
then processes them through a channel group interaction module
(CGIM) and a spatial Gaussian attention module (SGAM) to generate channel and spatial interaction feature maps, respectively.
Specifically, the CGIM splits the bitemporal feature maps into
multiple channelwise subspaces and applies interactive attention
to enhance cross-channel feature correlation. The SGAM calculates the mixed mean and joint variance at the spatial level of
bitemporal feature maps, which establish a Gaussian attention
kernel (GAK) capturing hidden difference features. Second,
the decoding part is designed in two phases: skip connections
and interaction-feature aggregation. The former decodes the
interactive feature maps from CGIM and SGAM separately. The
latter fuses multilayer channel and spatial interactive features
from the encoding part, which suppresses localization loss and
exploits richer semantic consistency of changed regions. Finally,
comprehensive experiments on three public datasets demonstrate
that the proposed method outperforms existing methods in both
quantitative and qualitative evaluations. The code is available at
https://github.com/ZChaoyv/DCSI-UNet
Index Terms—Change detection (CD), channel–spatial attention interaction, convolutional neural network (CNN), dualstream UNet, interaction-feature aggregation.

I. I NTRODUCTION
HANGE detection (CD) is an important task in remote
sensing (RS) image processing, which generates pixellevel binary change maps of ground objects by analyzing pairs
of images taken at different times in a specific geographic area.
Therefore, it can be applied to various fields such as urban
planning [1], [2], disaster assessment [3], [4], land cover [5],
[6], building change [7], [8], and environmental monitoring
[9]. The real change of the building can be obtained by
comparing and analyzing bitemporal images, as shown in the

C

Received 19 July 2025; revised 10 November 2025; accepted 7 December
2025. Date of publication 12 December 2025; date of current version 8 January
2026. (Corresponding authors: Qiuze Yu; Chaoyu Zhang.)
The authors are with the School of Electronic Information, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China (e-mail: chaoyv@whu.edu.cn; yuhenry007@whu.
edu.cn; aaysyl@126.com; 2018302080229@whu.edu.cn; 17361636069@
163.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TGRS.2025.3643508

Fig. 1. Illustration of CD. (a) and (b) Bitemporal images and (c) change map.
The green frame is an example of a real changed building object. The red
frame (1) and the yellow frames (2) are two examples of the pseudo changes
for tree occlusion and cars.

green frame in Fig. 1. However, pseudo changes can affect the
results due to different imaging times and occlusion by other
objects, as shown in the red frame (1) and yellow frames (2)
in Fig. 1, where the tree occlusion and the cars belong to
task-irrelevant pseudo changes. Therefore, the core of CD is
to accurately identify true regions of change, in other words,
to enhance the capture of difference features while reducing
task-irrelevant distractions.
CD methods can be broadly categorized into two groups:
traditional methods [10], [11], [12], [13] and deep learning
(DL) methods [14], [15], [16], [17], [18], [19], [20], [21],
[22]. Traditional methods include regression analysis [13],
change vector analysis [10], principal component analysis
[12], and k-means [11]. These methods recognize changed
regions by processing images and setting thresholds manually. Since only pixel-level differences and shallow features
are considered, they are not sufficient in reducing pseudochange interference. With the development of computer vision,
DL methods have been widely studied and applied in CD
tasks by virtue of their powerful feature extraction and detail
representation capabilities. These methods take bitemporal
images as input and generally establish end-to-end singlestream or dual-stream networks to generate binary change
maps.
Various current DL methods have shown that the combination of the UNet [23] multilayer feature fusion structure
[14], [23], [24], and attention [15], [18], [22], [25] can help
CD methods to learn changed regions more accurately. It
should be noted that CD is essentially a pixel-level binary
classification task (with 0 and 1 representing unchanged and
changed labels), in which fine-grained semantic features are
crucial for the adjudication of edges in changed regions.

1558-0644 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: FUDAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 20,2026 at 11:28:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5601115

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 64, 2026

Therefore, deploying the UNet-style feature fusion structure
at all layers can integrate different levels of semantic features
by upsampling them sequentially, capturing more accurate
difference features. In addition, the attention level of different
parts of bitemporal images can be dynamically adjusted by the
attention mechanism through feature extraction and attention
weight calculation. For example, channel attention (CA) [15],
[25] and spatial attention [18], [22] assign higher attention
weights to targets with higher semantic relevance in the feature
maps to promote effective feature propagation. As a result, real
changed regions in bitemporal images (buildings in Fig. 1) will
have higher semantic relevance, which are easily enhanced
and captured by attention. In recent years, Transformer [26]
has been proposed to break the limitation of the restricted
convolutional neural network (CNN) receptive field. Compared with convolutional attention [15], [25], it obtains an
accurate global receptive field through positional information
embedding and matrix projection to more precisely capture the
long-range semantic relations of bitemporal images. Therefore, a number of researchers have attempted to utilize a
Transformer or its similar variants, which further focus on
changed regions to gain performance improvements [16], [20],
[27], [28]. Although the above CD strategies have achieved
significant results, they still have the following shortcomings
in the capability of difference features extraction and effective
propagation:
1) Many methods focus on bitemporal images feature
extraction and utilize the absolute value of image
subtraction to obtain difference features, ignoring the
interactions between features, which inhibits the mining
of difference features.
2) Directly stack Transformer blocks in UNet-style structures, resulting in high computational costs, and
insufficiently utilize semantic information features
by considering bitemporal or differential features
separately.
3) Although both CA and spatial attention can improve the
CD accuracy, they ignore the co-modeling of channel
and spatial features, and these features may be different
in the edges and textures of changed regions.
In this article, we propose a dual-stream UNet with parallel
channel–spatial interaction and aggregation (DCSI-UNet) to
address existing issues. Most current methods extract difference features via feature subtraction, neglecting bitemporal
feature interactions and leading to insufficient mining of
hidden difference features; thus, we design the channel group
interaction module (CGIM) and spatial Gaussian attention
module (SGAM) to enhance such interactions from channel
subspace cross-interaction and spatial statistical distribution
modeling, respectively, overcoming isolated feature processing. While Transformer-based methods capture long-range
dependencies, stacking Transformer blocks raises computational cost and fails to fully fuse channel–spatial synergistic
features. We adopt a lightweight attention interaction to
avoid high Transformer overhead, and propose the interactionfeature aggregation module (IAM) to fuse channel–spatial
interaction features for low-cost and high-synergy feature
utilization. Most existing methods use CA and spatial attention

separately, ignoring their complementarity in changed regions.
DCSI-UNet designs CGIM and SGAM in parallel, with IAM
aggregating multilayer channel–spatial interaction features
to preserve edge details (spatial attention advantage) and
strengthen semantic correlations (CA advantage), effectively
suppressing localization errors.
Our contributions in this study can be concluded as follows.
1) We propose a DCSI-UNet for CD to enhance bitemporal
feature maps interaction in channels and spatial dimensions, allowing the propagation and discrimination of
difference features more efficiently and effectively.
2) We propose two plug-and-play interaction modules,
CGIM and SGAM. CGIM realizes channel feature
correlation to enhance cross-channel feature relevance.
SGAM constructs a Gaussian attention kernel (GAK)
to generate spatial weights, which strengthens spatial
interaction and difference features, thereby focusing on
real changed regions.
3) The IAM is proposed to aggregate multilayer channel
and spatial interaction features. It ensures the reliability
of co-modeling in both channel and spatial dimensions while maintaining fine-grained changed regions
boundaries.
The rest of this article is organized as follows. Section II
briefly reviews related works on CD. In Section III, the
proposed DCSI-UNet and design details of each module are
discussed. Section IV presents a detailed description and
analysis of the comparative and ablation study results. Finally,
Section V concludes this article.
II. R ELATED W ORK
According to the feature extraction and feature information
fusion strategies, the current mainstream DL methods in CD
can be broadly categorized into two groups: the CNN-based
and the Transformer-based. The former highlights the validity
of the UNet-style multilayer feature fusion structure and the
attention of feature extraction. The latter obtains global sensing
capability by establishing long-distance dependence on features, demonstrating its effectiveness in feature enhancement
and feature interaction to get performance improvement.
A. CNN-Based Methods in CD
In order to cope with irrelevant changes and complex
objects, CNN-based methods usually deploy the UNet structure to fuse the multilayer features to achieve a combination
of low-level features for the localization of changed regions
and high-level features with sufficient semantic information.
UNet [23] was originally proposed for semantic segmentation
[29], [30]. It recursively fuses two layers of neighboring
feature maps using upsampling and skip connections, showing
excellent performance on a variety of pixel-level tasks. The
UNet structure in CD can be categorized into single-stream
[14] and dual-stream [14], [18], [19], [31], [32], [33], [34]
based on the processing of the input images. The singlestream structure first concatenates the bitemporal images and
feeds them directly into UNet for feature extraction, and then
decodes them to predict the change map. The dual-stream

Authorized licensed use limited to: FUDAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 20,2026 at 11:28:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: DUAL-STREAM UNet WITH PARALLEL CHANNEL–SPATIAL INTERACTION AND AGGREGATION

5601115

Fig. 2. Illustration of DCSI-UNet. The four-layer bitemporal feature maps are first extracted using the ResConv structural encoder. Then, the bitemporal
feature maps are fed into CGIM and SGAM to enhance the feature interactions in both channel and spatial dimensions. After that, the interaction feature maps
generated by CGIM and SGAM are decoded using skip connections, and IAM is introduced to aggregate the interaction features. Finally, a weight adaptive
prediction head is used to predict the change map.

structure first uses the two encoders of UNet to achieve dualbranch feature extraction on the bitemporal images, and then
decodes the difference absolute values of these features or
concatenates them together to predict the change map. Obviously, the lack of independent original input images makes it
difficult for single-stream CD networks to extract fine features
of bitemporal images, which is not conducive for the extraction
and propagation of difference features. To more fully utilize
multilayer feature maps, UNet++ [24] was proposed. Its core
characteristic is the nesting of dense skip connections on the
dual-stream structure, which enables each layer in the decoder
to fuse feature maps from different layers of the encoder,
but leads to an increase in computational complexity. These
studies have amply demonstrated the excellent performance of
the UNet-style structure in CD.
In addition, dual-stream structure can be designed using
weight-sharing (Siamese) [14], [19], [32], [34] or nonweightsharing [18], [31], [33]. The advantage of the weight-sharing is
that it has fewer parameters (Params.) and great generalization.
However, the weight-sharing encoder may result in a weaker
feature extraction ability, thereby affecting the identifying
accuracy of true regions of change. This problem can be
solved by using a nonweight-sharing encoder, but this often
leads to an increase in the number of Params. or overfitting
due to inconsistencies in the feature space. In order to solve
this problem, it is necessary to design a method for the
CD that allows the features to be fully interacted with and
utilized.

Various types of convolutional attention [15], [18], [22],
[25], [35], [36] have also been extensively studied in order
to more precisely capture difference features to facilitate the
recognition of changed regions. Specifically, such methods can
utilize convolution and multilayer perceptron (MLP) to achieve
mapping of feature weights to enhance attention on taskrelevant features. Representative methods include IFNet [35]
and SNUNet [15]. IFNet uses both CA and spatial attention
in multiscale feature fusion for improving the integrity and
internal compactness of changed region boundaries. SNUNet
uses improved CA for extracting output group relations, which
is used to achieve feature refinement and suppress localization
differences. Such methods can also use a combination of
convolution and mathematical computation to achieve adaptive
enhancement of feature weight distributions. Examples include
USSFC-Net [18] and SEIFNet [22]. USSFC-Net uses a combination of Nadaraya–Watson and dilation convolution to model
spatial–spectral dependencies for feature enrichment. SEIFNet
uses coordinate correlations for enhanced global and local
feature capture by injecting them into attentions. However,
despite the bright results of these CNN methods in improving
CD performance, the ability to model remote dependencies
remains to be explored due to the limitations of the CNN
perceptual domain.
B. Transformer-Based Methods in CD
Transformer [26] has global attention capabilities and can
help capture long-range dependencies between contextual

Authorized licensed use limited to: FUDAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 20,2026 at 11:28:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5601115

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 64, 2026

information to enhance feature representation. Specifically, the
Transformer first adopts the class token and patch embedding,
and uses matrix projection to obtain multihead self-attention.
Then, it uses an MLP to further enhance the feature representation and incorporates multihead self-attention with skip
connections. With the strong and robust representation on
large-scale datasets, the Transformer-based methods show
comparable or even better performance than the CNN. Therefore, they have been widely applied in visual tasks, including
image classification [37], [38], [39], semantic segmentation
[40], [41], object detection [42], [43], and super-resolution
[44], [45], [46]. This excellent global attention capability of
the Transformer has also been applied to CD tasks to improve
performance. For example, BIT [16] uses a lightweight Transformer encoder and two Transformer decoders to effectively
model the spatiotemporal context. Changeformer [27] combines a hierarchical Transformer encoder with an MLP decoder
within a Siamese network architecture to effectively present
the multiscale long-range details required for precise CD.
To complement the advantages of CNN and Transformers,
capture texture details while establishing long-range semantic correlations, and improve computational efficiency, some
methods utilize Transformers as attention blocks embedded
in CNN networks. They achieve channel or spatial attention
at different scales of bitemporal images, thereby enhancing
detection capabilities. Since they rely on the self-attention
of Transformers to realize key functions, they still belong
to Transformer-based methods. For example, ELGC-Net [21]
constructs spatial attention by combining improved pooling operations with Transformer to enhance global context
and local spatial feature extraction. AMTNet [47] enhances
the detection performance by constructing the Transformer
with spatial and channel dual-attention to capture long-range
dependencies for a more discriminative feature representation.
Although these Transformer-based CD methods have achieved
significant detection results, the stacking of Transformer on the
backbone does not allow glimpses of feature representations on
another image, resulting in still insufficient interaction between
bitemporal images. As a consequence, researchers have begun
to explore feature interactions between neighboring scales.
Feng et al. [20] proposed a dual-branch multilevel intertemporal network (DMINet), which extracts features through
CNNs and uses JointAtt to guide the global feature distribution of each input. Zhang et al. [34] propose a multiscale
cascaded cross-attention hierarchical network (MSCCA-Net),
which designs multiscale cascade cross-attention for crossfusing hierarchical features, and realizes semantic feature
redistribution by modeling channel correlations through channel projections on the output feature map. The above studies
indicate that feature interactions between dimensions of bitemporal images are beneficial for the detail and localization of
changed regions.
III. M ETHODOLOGY
A. Network Overview
In this section, we focus on the overall design and architecture of the proposed DCSI-UNet, as shown in Fig. 2, which

Algorithm 1 Overall CD Process of DCSI-UNet
Input: Bitemporal images: Img1 , Img2
Output: Change map: CM
1: // Extracting the four-layer bitemporal feature maps
through the non-weight-sharing encoder
2: {F1l | l = 1, 2, 3, 4} = Encoder(Img1 )
3: {F2l | l = 1, 2, 3, 4} = Encoder(Img2 )
4: // Refining channel and spatial feature interactions through
CGIM and SGAM
5: for l = 1 to 4 do

6:
Fcl = CGIM F1l , F2l 
7:
Fsl = SGAM F1l , F2l
8:
Fg l = Concat (Fcl , Fsl )
9: end for
10: // Decoding channel and spatial interaction feature maps
through upsampling operations and ResConv
11: for l = 4 to 1 do
12:
if l = 4 then
13:
Ycl = ResConv (Fcl )
14:
Ysl = ResConv (Fsl )
15:
else

16:
Ycl = ResConv Concat Fcl , Yc(l+1) ↑
17:
Ysl = ResConv Concat Fsl , Ys(l+1) ↑
18:
end if
19: end for
20: // Fusing the multilayer channel and spatial interaction
feature maps through IAM 
21: Yg = IAM Fg 1 , Fg 2 , Fg 3 , Fg 4
22: // Predicting the change map through the classifier
23: CM = Predictor(Yc1 , Ys1 , Yg )

consists of an encoding part and a decoding part, with the
decoding further divided into two phases. Specifically, Img1
and Img2 ∈ RH×W×3 represent the bitemporal images input
to the DCSI-UNet, where H and W denote the height and
width of the images, respectively. The decoded output finally
generates a binary change map CM ∈ RH×W×1 via a weight
adaptive prediction head. Algorithm 1 shows the overall CD
process of our DCSI-UNet.
1) Encoding Part: Residual convolutional (ResConv)
blocks [48] and max-pooling operations are used as the dualstream nonweight-sharing backbone of the encoding part, as
shown in Fig. 2, to extract the four-layer bitemporal feature
maps. After each layer of feature extraction operation, CGIM
and SGAM accept bitemporal feature maps as inputs, producing channel and spatial interaction feature maps. Details of
CGIM and SGAM are presented in Fig. 3(a) and (b). Then,
each CGIM and SGAM generated interaction feature map is
stacked as channel and spatial dimension guiding feature map
for the decoding part. The encoding process can be described
as follows:

Ftl = ResConv Imgt ↓, l = 1
(1)

t
t
Fl = ResConv Fl−1 ↓, l = 2, 3, 4
(2)

1
2
(3)
Fcl = CGIM Fl , Fl

1
2
(4)
F sl = SGAM Fl , Fl

Authorized licensed use limited to: FUDAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 20,2026 at 11:28:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: DUAL-STREAM UNet WITH PARALLEL CHANNEL–SPATIAL INTERACTION AND AGGREGATION

5601115

Fig. 3. Illustration of the proposed modules. (a) Our CGIM. (b) Our SGAM. (c) IAM.

Fg l = Concat (Fcl , F sl )
l

l

(5)

l −1

where Ftl ∈ R(H/2 )×(W/2 )×2 C represents the feature map of
the lth (l = 1, 2, 3, and 4) layer with time phase t = 1
l
l
l −1
l
l
l −1
and 2. Fcl ∈ R(H/2 )×(W/2 )×2 C and F sl ∈ R(H/2 )×(W/2 )×2 C
represent the interaction feature maps generated by CGIM or
SGAM in the lth layer, respectively. ResConv(·) refers to the
ResConv operation, and the function (·) ↓ denotes the 2 × 2
max-pooling operations. Concat(·) represents the concatenal
l
l
tion along the channel dimension. Fg l ∈ R(H/2 )×(W/2 )×2 C
represents the guiding feature maps at the lth layer.
2) Decoding Part: The first phase of the decoding part
consists of dual-stream upsampling operations and ResConv,
using skip connections to sequentially generate two feature
l
l
l −1
l
l
l −1
maps, Ycl ∈ R(H/2 )×(W/2 )×2 C and Y sl ∈ R(H/2 )×(W/2 )×2 C .
At the fourth layer, the outputs of CGIM and SGAM, Fc4 and
F s4 , are directly decoded through ResConv to obtain Yc4 and
Y s4 . In the first three layers, Fcl and F sl are concatenated with
the upsampled outputs from the subsequent layer Ycl+1 and
Y sl+1 , and then fed into ResConv for decoding to produce Ycl
and Y sl . The first phase of the decoding part can be described
as follows:
Ycl = ResConv (Fcl ) ,
Y sl = ResConv (F sl ) ,

l=4

l=4
 
Ycl = ResConv Concat Fcl , Ycl+1 ↑ ,
 
Y sl = ResConv Concat F sl , Y sl+1 ↑ ,

ultimately producing Yg ∈ R(H/2)×(W/2)×C . Detailed information on IAM is shown in Fig. 3(c). This process can be
summarized as follows:

Yg = IAM Fg 1 , Fg 2 , Fg 3 , Fg 4 .
(10)
3) Prediction: We adopt a weight adaptive prediction head
to generate the CM, as shown in Fig. 1. Specifically, the Yc1 ,
Y s1 , and Yg are upsampled back to the original image size, and
the number of channels is mapped to 2 by convolutional layers.
Then, the mapped outputs are multiplied by learnable Params.
α1 , α2 , and α3 as voting weights, yielding the predicted outputs
P1 ∈ RH×W×2 , P2 ∈ RH×W×2 , and P3 ∈ RH×W×2 . Finally,
the predicted outputs are summed and converted from a twochannel map into a one-channel map by argmax operations to
obtain CM
Pi = αi × Conv ((Yi ) ↑) , i = 1, 2, 3
CM = Argmax (P1 + P2 + P3 )

(11)
(12)

where Conv(·) denotes the convolution operation. Let Y1 =
Yc1 , Y2 = Y s1 , and Y3 = Yg .

(6)

B. Channel Group Interaction Module

(7)

For bitemporal feature maps, feature interactions need
to be investigated before capturing true difference features,
and neighboring pixels in different channels usually exhibit
correlations. To enhance the channel correlation for mining
potential changed regions, we propose CGIM, as shown in
Fig. 3(a). Unlike the attentions proposed by other methods,
CGIM does not perform operations such as splicing and
channel adjustment of features in isolation, but facilitates the
weight distribution of difference features in different channels

l<4

(8)

l<4

(9)

where the function (·) ↑ denotes the upsampling operation
using bilinear interpolation.
The second phase of the decoding part takes the guiding
features {Fg l |l = 1, 2, 3, 4} as inputs and introduces IAM to
fuse multilayer channel and spatial interaction feature maps,

Authorized licensed use limited to: FUDAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 20,2026 at 11:28:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5601115

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 64, 2026

by mutual attention between bitemporal feature map channel
subspaces.
First, the input bitemporal feature maps F1 , F2 ∈ RH×W×C
are stacked along the channel dimension, generating the fused
tensor Xfuse ∈ RH×W×2C . Then, Xfuse is processed through a
1 × 1 convolution to reduce the number of channels to C,
and reshaped into Qfuse ∈ RHW×C as the fused query. Qfuse
encapsulates both individual image information and shared
semantic features from the other image. Subsequently, F1 and
F2 are each passed through 1 × 1 convolutions and reshaped
to generate their respective keys K1 , K2 ∈ RHW×C and values
V1 , V2 ∈ RHW×C . This process can be described as follows:

vanishing gradients caused by too large or too small values
of weights after direct matrix multiplication. In addition, the
size of the adjusted attention matrix is (C/n) × (C/n) (the size
of most attention matrices is HW × HW), which effectively
reduces memory consumption and improves computational
efficiency.
Attention score matrix is applied within each channel
subspace to achieve CA, resulting in the interaction outputs
outtfuse m ∈ RHW×(C/n) for each subspace

outtfuse m = Vtm · Softmax(Qfuse m )T · Softmax Ktm

Qfuse = Conv (Xfuse ) = Xfuse WQ

Kt = Conv Ft = Ft WtK

Vt = Conv Ft = Ft WtV

Then, the interaction outputs from each channel subspace
˜ t ∈ RHW×C .
are stacked along the channel dimension to form X
The overall process of our MCIS can be summarized as
follows:

X̃t = MCIS Kt , Qfuse , Vt

= Concat Vt1 · Atttfuse 1 , Vt2 · Atttfuse 2 , . . . , Vtn · Atttfuse n

(18)
= Concat outtfuse 1 , outtfuse 2 , . . . , outtfuse n .

(13)
(14)
(15)

where C, H, and W represent the channels, height, and
width of the feature maps, respectively. Conv(·) denotes the
convolution operation. WQ , WtK , WtV ∈ RC×C represent the
weight matrices for the query, key, and value linear mappings,
respectively, where t represents the temporal phase of the
feature map.
Subsequently, Qfuse , Kt , and Vt are fed into the multisubspace channel interaction strategy (MCIS), as shown in
Fig. 3(a). MCIS first adjusts Qfuse , Kt , and Vt along the
channel dimension from C to C/n, dividing them into n
groups, each representing a channel subspace. Specifically,
the matrices are reshaped as Qfuse , Kt , Vt ∈ Rn×HW×(C/n) .
For each subspace, Qfuse m , Ktm , Vtm ∈ RHW×(C/n) , where m
is the subspace index. We propose an improved method of
attention computation by first performing a channel dimension
softmax operation on Qfuse and Ktm , which transforms each
element into a probability distribution across channels. After
this process, Ktm is regarded as the CA template and Qfuse m
is the corresponding weight query coefficient. Subsequently,
Qfuse m is transposed and multiplied by Ktm , allowing each
position in Qfuse m to interact with all positions in Ktm . This
process ensures a thorough interaction between individual and
fused information, enabling a more refined representation of
attention and generating the attention score matrix for each
subspace, as described in the following:

Atttfuse m = Softmax(Qfuse m )T · Softmax Ktm
(16)
where Atttfuse m ∈ R(C/n)×(C/n) represents the attention score
matrix. T denotes the transpose operation. n denotes the
number of channel subspaces.
Most of the attention first performs transpose and multiply operations on query and key, and then performs the
softmax operation. In contrast, the attention in our method
has significant improvements in computational stability and
memory consumption. Specifically, the softmax process is first
performed on the channel dimensions to generate normalized
distributions prior to matrix multiplication, so that meaningful
distributions can be generated on channels to motivate interactions [34]. This operation not only highlights the important
features and weakens the unimportant ones, but also mitigates
the computational instability problems such as exploding or

= Vtm · Atttfuse m .

(17)

˜ t incorporates partial information from the
Functionally, X
other feature map, reducing the learning of irrelevant features.
Structurally, each interaction is restricted to a limited channel
range and interacts with another feature map. This design
effectively captures channel-level differences and reduces fea˜ 1 and X
˜ 2 are stacked and multiplied
ture overfitting. Finally, X
by a learnable parameter µ (initialized to 0) to dynamically
adjust the attention weights. To prevent loss of the original
feature, Xfuse is added, and then, a convolution operation
is performed to obtain the final channel interaction feature
map Fc

˜ 1 + X̃2 .
Fc = Conv Xfuse + µ · Concat X
(19)
C. Spatial Gaussian Attention Module
Images captured at different times may be affected by
irrelevant factors such as illumination intensity and vegetation changes, which can lead to discrepancies in semantic
features between bitemporal images. If bitemporal feature
maps are directly stacked or absolute-value differenced, spatial
dependence will be ignored, and difference features may be
hidden in the background. Therefore, we propose SGAM, as
shown in Fig. 3(b), which aims to model spatial interactions
and dependence to enhance the difference representation in
changed regions.
In CrossAtt [19], [34], interaction perception is to find
the relationship between the bitemporal feature maps queries
and keys and mapping them to an attention matrix, which
is then applied to the values to refine the feature maps. To
get the attention relationship between queries and keys, we
take inspiration from Nadaraya–Watson kernel regression in
spatial correlation expansion and design GAK. We generalize
Gaussian kernel attention on bitemporal feature maps, thereby
designing a Gaussian attention-based strategy, SGAM, for
spatial interaction and feature enhancement.
Specifically, the bitemporal feature maps Ft ∈ RH×W×C are
used as input, where t denotes the temporal phase of the feature

Authorized licensed use limited to: FUDAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 20,2026 at 11:28:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: DUAL-STREAM UNet WITH PARALLEL CHANNEL–SPATIAL INTERACTION AND AGGREGATION

maps. Then, the number of channels is reduced by half using
1 × 1 convolution, resulting in the tensor At ∈ RH×W×(C/2) ,
which facilitates spatial concatenation of the bitemporal feature maps. Next, At passes through a BatchNorm (BN) and
an rectified linear unit (ReLU) activation operations, yielding
˜ t ∈ RH×W×(C/2)
the tensor A


˜ t = ReLU BN At .
At = Conv Xt , A
(20)
Attention solely from self-feature may lead to the loss of
shared feature information. Therefore, we compensate for this
by incorporating correlation for bitemporal features. Inspired
by the calculation method of the Transformer [26] and the
2
2
Gaussian function g(x) = e−((x−µ) )/(2σ ) [49], [50], [51], we
˜ t is used as the query, while
propose the GAK. Specifically, A
˜
the corresponding feature map At¯ serves as the key. By computing the mixed mean and joint variance of the bitemporal
feature maps, the hidden difference features based can be
enhanced by statistical distribution. Therefore, we inject mixed
mean and joint variance and extend the Nadaraya–Watson
kernel regression to a higher dimension. First, the mixed mean
˜ 1 and
M ∈ R1×1×C is computed in the spatial dimension of A
2
Ã . Then, for each spatial level, the squared Euclidean distance
˜ t and M is calculated to represent
between each element of A
˜ t relative to M is
the difference. The joint variance θt 2 of A
˜ t with
computed by dividing the squared Frobenius norm of A
M by the total number of spatial elements. These results are
substituted into the exponential part of the Gaussian function
to form the Gaussian kernel. Inspired by USSFC-Net [18],
we add a bias of 0.5 to enhance global perception and achieve
better attention weight distribution. o is a small constant added
to ensure numerical stability. Finally, the sigmoid function
is applied to normalize the weight mapping to obtain the
Gaussian attention score GAttt , as mathematically expressed
as follows:
!

˜t −M 2
A
t
+ 0.5
(21)
GAtt = sigmoid
2θt 2 + o
H−1 W−1

M=

1 X X Ã1 (i, j) + Ã2 (i, j)
H×W
2

(22)

i=0 j=0

H−1 W−1

2
1 XX ˜t
A (i, j) − M .
θ =
H×W
t2

(23)

i=0 j=0

˜ t is obtained by a 1 × 1 convoThe corresponding value A
V
t
˜
˜
lutional mapping A . Then, AtV Hadamard product with GAttt
to yield Aˆ t . The GAK can be expressed as follows:

˜ t, A
˜ t¯, A
˜ tV , t , t¯
ˆ t = GAK A
A
˜ tV
= GAttt A
!

˜t −M 2
A
= sigmoid
+ 0.5
ÃtV
(24)
2θt 2 + o
˜ t and A
˜ t¯ represent different temporal feature maps.
where A
denotes the Hadamard product.
ˆ 1 and A
ˆ 2 are weighted by a shared parameter β (initialized
A
to 0) adaptively adjusted and added to tensors A1 and A2 ,

5601115

preserving original information while directing global attention to regions where changes actually occur. Finally, spatial
interaction feature maps F s are obtained through the ResConv

ˆ 1 + A1 , β · Â2 + A2 . (25)
F s = ResConv Concat β · A
D. Interaction-Feature Aggregation Module
Bitemporal feature maps establish strong channel interaction via CGIM and spatial interaction via SGAM. However,
Cheng et al. [52] and Jiang et al. [53] exhibit different attentions that may differ in edge fine-grained details; therefore, a
strategy is needed to jointly consider the relationship between
these two interaction feature maps (which are generated by
CGIM and SGAM), aggregating different semantic features
on the channel and spatial interaction feature maps. For this
reason, we design the IAM, as shown in Fig. 3(c), to further
fuse channel and spatial interaction features, which enrich
the edge and texture details of the changed regions. Stacking
the channel and spatial interaction feature maps from the
encoding stage yields the four-layer guiding feature maps
{Fg l |l = 1, 2, 3, 4}. These guiding feature maps vary in size
and represent different semantic levels and spatial positions. It
has been shown in [15] that the shallow-layer features possess
more precise localization, and the deep-layer features possess
richer semantics (this will be further visualized in the subsequent heatmap visualization). Therefore, in the design of IAM,
multilayer features are fused via CA and Hadamard product
to balance localization accuracy and semantic consistency,
thereby suppressing localization loss.
First, since the guiding feature maps in the subsequent layer
are half the size of those in the preceding layer and have
twice the number of channels, we first perform an upsampling
operation to match the image size, and then align the channel
dimension using a 1 × 1 convolution. Second, as shown in
Fig. 3(c), CA is used to learn the channel feature distribution
weights of the guiding feature maps, and these weights are
added to the guiding feature map of the preceding layer to
reinforce important channels that are relevant to the CD. After
that, since the values of changed regions on feature maps
tend to be larger, we use a convolution operation to map the
guiding feature map to spatial attention, and then apply the
Hadamard product between it and the guiding feature map
of the preceding layer, which further highlights the features
and maintains localization. Eventually, the above operation
is repeated on each layer of the guiding feature maps to
achieve the aggregation of the channel and spatial interaction
feature maps of all layers, generating Yg . This process can be
described as follows:

Yg = IAM Fg 1 , Fg 2 , Fg 3 , Fg 4
 
= Conv Fˆ g1 ↑
(26)


ˆFgl = Fgl + CA F˜ gl+1
Conv F̃gl+1 , l = 1, 2, 3
(27)
 
F˜ gl = Conv Fˆ gl ↑ , l = 2, 3
(28)
F̃g4 = Conv ((F4 ) ↑)

(29)

CA (F) = δ MLP Avg (F) + MLP (Max (F))




Authorized licensed use limited to: FUDAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 20,2026 at 11:28:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(30)

5601115

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 64, 2026

TABLE I
BASIC I NFORMATION A BOUT THE E XPERIMENTAL DATASETS

where Avg(·) and Max(·) denote the average pooling and maxpooling operations across the channel dimension, respectively.
MLP(·) represents a multilayer perceptron. δ(·) denotes the
sigmoid function. represents the Hadamard product. Conv(·)
refers to the convolution operation. The function (·) ↑ denotes
the upsampling operation using bilinear interpolation.
E. Loss Function
The process of generating CM using weight adaptive prediction head produced three different predicted outputs P1 ,
P2 , and P3 . In the DCSI-UNet training phase, we minimize
the cross-entropy loss [16], [17] Lce between three predicted
outputs P1 , P2 , and P3 and the ground truth GT to optimize
the DCSI-UNet Params. The Lce is expressed as follows:
N
X



ˆ =−1
Lce GT, Y
GTi log2 Ŷi
N
i=1

ˆi
+ (1 − GTi ) log2 1 − Y



(31)

where GTi represents the ground-truth label, with values of 0
ˆ i represents the prediction probability, ranging between
or 1. Y
0 and 1. N denotes the total number of pixels in a change
map. Our total training loss L can be expressed as


te
(λ1 Lce (GT, Φ (P1 )) + λ2 Lce (GT, Φ (P2 ))
L= 1−
Te
+ λ3 Lce (GT, Φ (P3 )))
(32)
where λ1 , λ2 , and λ3 are the tradeoff Params. applied to
regulate the influence of each loss. In the experiments, their
weights are all set to 1 because we consider P1 , P2 , and P3 to
contribute equally to the loss. Additionally, the loss function
decreases as the number of training epochs increases, ensuring
DCSI-UNet convergence. T e represents the total number of
training epochs, and te represents the current epoch. Φ(·) is
the log-softmax function, which converts the predicted output
to a prediction probability in the range of 0–1.
IV. E XPERIMENTS
A. Datasets and Experimental Setup
1) Dataset: We demonstrated the validity of DCSI-UNet
on three publicly researched datasets, as shown in Table I.
The first dataset, LEVIR-CD1 [54], contains 637 pairs of
ultrahigh resolution images (0.5 m) selected from Google
Earth, spanning from 2002 to 2018. It covers multiple cities
and locations in TX, USA, which is primarily used to study
land change and land use, especially for buildings. In this
1 https://justchenhao.github.io/LEVIR

experiment, the images are cropped into 256 × 256 image
patch pairs and randomly divided into 7120/1024/2048 copies
for training/validation/testing in the ratio of 7:1:2.
The second dataset, CDD2 [27], consists of RS images taken
by Google Earth of the same geographical area. Changes in the
dataset are mainly caused by buildings, vehicles, roads, and
seasonal variations. In this experiment, the images are cropped
into 256 × 256 image patch pairs and randomly divided into
10 000/2998/3000 copies for training/validation/testing in the
ratio of 10:3:3.
The third dataset, WHU-CD3 [55], is a large public
CD dataset based on RS images before and after the
Christchurch earthquake in New Zealand, which include many
rebuilt or newly constructed buildings. In this experiment,
the images are cropped into 256 × 256 image patch pairs
and randomly divided into 5947/743/744 copies for training/validation/testing in the ratio of 8:1:1.
2) Evaluation Metrics: To evaluate the performance of the
method in our experiments, we used six classical evaluation
metrics derived from the confusion matrix: precision (Pre.),
recall (Rec.), F1-score (F1), intersection over union (IoU),
overall accuracy (OA), and Kappa. The definitions of the
six evaluation metrics are specified as follows. Precision:
It reflects the proportion of truly changed pixels among all
predicted changed pixels. Recall: It represents the proportion
of correctly predicted changed pixels among all actually
changed pixels. F1-Score: The F1-score is the harmonic mean
of precision and recall, balancing their tradeoff and providing
a comprehensive assessment of the model’s CD performance.
IoU: It is calculated as the ratio of the intersection area to
the union area of predicted and ground-truth changed regions,
reflecting the spatial consistency of predictions. OA: It denotes
the proportion of correctly classified pixels among all pixels
in the image. Kappa Coefficient: It evaluates the consistency
between the model’s predictions and ground truth, which is
particularly effective for datasets with imbalanced changed and
unchanged pixel counts. The mathematical formulas for these
metrics are given as follows:
TP
TP + FP
TP
Recall =
TP + FN

Precision =

(33)
(34)

2
(35)
Precision−1 + Recall−1
TP
IoU =
(36)
TP + FP + FN
TP + TN
OA =
(37)
TP + FP + TN + FN
OA − Pe
Kappa =
(38)
1− Pe
where true positive (TP) denotes the total number of samples
correctly identified as changing pixels, false positive (FP)
denotes the total number of samples incorrectly identified as
changing pixels, true negative (TN) denotes the total number
F1 =

2 https://drive.google.com/file/d/1GX656JqqOyBi Ef0w65kDGVtonHrNs9
3 https://aistudio.baidu.com/datasetdetail/251669

Authorized licensed use limited to: FUDAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 20,2026 at 11:28:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: DUAL-STREAM UNet WITH PARALLEL CHANNEL–SPATIAL INTERACTION AND AGGREGATION

5601115

TABLE II
Q UANTITATIVE A NALYSIS AND C OMPARATIVE R ESULTS OF CD A LGORITHMS ON VARIOUS DATASETS . T HE B EST
R ESULTS A RE IN B OLD . A LL R ESULTS A RE E XPRESSED IN %

of samples correctly identified as unchanged pixels, and false
negative (FN) denotes the total number of samples incorrectly
identified as unchanged pixels. Pe (expected agreement) is a
part of the Kappa coefficient that represents the proportion of
expected consistency and can be expressed as
(TP + FN) × (TP + FP) + (TN + FP) × (TN + FN)
Pe =
.
(TP + TN + FP + FN)2
(39)
3) Implementation Details: In our experiments, the proposed DCSI-UNet is implemented using the Pytorch framework. For fairness, all the experiments are consistently
conducted on the workstation with AMD EPYC 7262 8-Core
and GPU of NVIDIA RTX 3090 with 24 GB of video memory,
and use the existing data augmentation strategies in [16].
During training, we set the C = 32 in DCSI-UNet and set
λ1 = λ2 = λ3 = 1 in the loss function. We optimized the
network Params. using the stochastic gradient descent (SGD)
algorithm. The batch size is set to 16, and training lasts for
200 epochs with a learning rate of 0.01, momentum of 0.99,
and weight decay of 5e−4 . We save the method Params. that
keep the highest validation mF1 score for the test.
We totally select 11 advanced CD methods to make the
comparisons, specifically, FC-EF [14], FC-SD [14], FC-SC
[14], SNUNet [15], BIT [16], ICIF-Net [17], USSFC-Net [18],
HANet [19], DMINet [20], ELGC-Net [21], and SEIFNet [22].
To ensure rigor and fairness, all comparison methods were
reproduced on the same dataset, using the same hardware and
software configurations and following the parameter settings
in the original article.
B. Comparison and Analysis
To evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed DCSI-UNet,
we conducted extensive experiments on three datasets. The
results of these experiments are sufficient to demonstrate the
excellent performance of DCSI-UNet because the comparison
methodology used has yielded significant results in the field.
The results of six metrics on the LEVIR-CD, CDD, and WHUCD datasets are presented in Table II and the best values are
marked in bold.

From the data, our method has excellent performance in F1,
IoU, OA, and kappa on the three datasets. Although precision
and recall are sometimes slightly below the optimal values,
they perform relatively well in these two aspects, thus achieving optimal F1 scores on three datasets. Notably, the proposed
method is characterized by channel and spatial interaction,
i.e., two interacting attentions contribute to difference features
recognition. Therefore, precision and recall can be equalized
during training, preventing DCSI-UNet from focusing too
much on a single aspect of learning. It helps to improve
the overall F1, demonstrating the robustness of DCSI-UNet.
Furthermore, due to the weight adaptive prediction head, the
prediction outputs P1 , P2 , and P3 adaptively adjust their
contributions in the change map, thus moving DCSI-UNet
toward the overall optimum. The optimal value of F1 reflects
the strong ability of DCSI-UNet to mine real changed regions.
Specifically, DCSI-UNet improves the F1 on the LEVIRCD dataset by 1.51%, 1.56%, 1.41%, 1.29%, 1.07%, 1.14%,
0.35%, and 1.46% over SNUNet, BIT, ICIF-Net, USSFCNet, HANet, DMINet, ELGC-Net, and SEIFNet. The F1 of
DCSI-UNet on CDD dataset is improved by 2.44%, 2.72%,
2.04%, 2.33%, 3.8%, 0.8%, 0.7%, and 0.69% over SNUNet,
BIT, ICIF-Net, USSFC-Net, HANet, DMINet, ELGC-Net, and
SEIFNet. The F1 of DCSI-UNet on the WHU-CD dataset
is increased by 4.26%, 4.6%, 2.56%, 2.23%, 4.36%, 4.17%,
2.63%, and 4.27% over SNUNet, BIT, ICIF-Net, USSFCNet, HANet, DMINet, ELGC-Net, and SEIFNet. The above
results show that our method can handle architectural and
general CD tasks well. We propose CGIM and SGAM to
enhance channel and spatial bitemporal feature interactions,
suppressing pseudo changes and promoting capturing real
changed regions. Meanwhile, the introduction of IAM can
mine richer consistency difference of interaction features.
We also conducted a visual analysis of the predicted results
of each method on the datasets to provide an intuitive understanding of the performance of each method on the CD
task. Different colors were assigned to the predicted images
to distinguish the correctness of different regions, with TP
(white), TN (black), FN (green), and FP (red). In order to

Authorized licensed use limited to: FUDAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 20,2026 at 11:28:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5601115

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 64, 2026

Fig. 4. Visualization results of the compared methods on the LEVIR-CD dataset. TP (white), TN (black), FN (green), and FP (red). (a)–(d) Denote different
sample images selected from the test set for visual comparison.

Fig. 5. Visualization results of the compared methods on the CDD dataset. TP (white), TN (black), FN (green), and FP (red). (a)–(d) Denote different sample
images selected from the test set for visual comparison.

precisely characterize the change of interest, CD methods
should to the greatest extent suppress the FP and FN (red
and green) regions.
1) Visualization on LEVIR-CD: The results in Fig. 4(a)–(d)
demonstrate that our proposed method can characterize the
real changes in buildings with the highest accuracy. The
results in Fig. 4(c) show that our method has the lowest
false detection rate, highlighting its superior anti-interference
capability. When changes are hidden in the environment,
DCSI-UNet can effectively identify the real changed areas,
further confirming its advanced differential discrimination
capability.
2) Visualization on CDD: In the CDD dataset, we selected
several representative image pairs for comparison. For example, as shown in Fig. 5(a), the visualization results show the
strong edge detection and maintenance capability of DCSIUNet under the influence of lighting variations. Fig. 5(b)
and (c) shows seasonal variations that lead to roads being
covered by snow. The visualization results clearly show that

the DCSI-UNet has excellent discrimination capability and can
provide a visual experience that is highly similar to the ground
truth. In Fig. 5(d), although the changed regions are hidden
in the environment, DCSI-UNet can accurately identify them.
Therefore, the above visualization results fully validate the
strong anti-interference and difference recognition capability
of DCSI-UNet.
3) Visualization on WHU-CD: The presence of a large
number of negative samples in the WHU-CD dataset is
prone to leakage and misdetection. Objectively speaking,
our method effectively mitigates this problem. In Fig. 6(a),
where land changes to buildings, only DCSI-UNet accurately
focuses on the real change. Most methods struggle to discern the changed areas in Fig. 6(b)–(d), particularly when
distinguishing the ground with similar color characteristics
as buildings. However, DCSI-UNet fully takes into account
the interactions between the channel and space, and shows
strong capability in recognizing hidden features in complex
environments.

Authorized licensed use limited to: FUDAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 20,2026 at 11:28:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: DUAL-STREAM UNet WITH PARALLEL CHANNEL–SPATIAL INTERACTION AND AGGREGATION

5601115

Fig. 6. Visualization results of the compared methods on the WHU-CD dataset. TP (white), TN (black), FN (green), and FP (red). (a)–(d) Denote different
sample images selected from the test set for visual comparison.
TABLE III
PARAMETERS AND E FFICIENCY. W E R ECORDED THE N UMBER OF M ETHOD
PARAMETERS , THE FLOP S , AND THE C ORRESPONDING F1 FOR E ACH
M ETHOD ON THE LEVIR-CD DATASET W ITH AN I NPUT I MAGE
S IZE OF 256 × 256 × 3. T HE B EST R ESULTS A RE IN B OLD

TABLE IV
A BLATION S TUDY OF D IFFERENT E NCODING PART BACKBONES IN
DCSI-UN ET BASED ON THE LEVIR-CD DATASET. T HE
B EST R ESULTS A RE IN B OLD

TABLE V
A BLATION E XPERIMENTS ON D IFFERENT M ODULES AND B RANCHES ON
THE LEVIR-CD DATASET. T HE B EST R ESULTS A RE IN B OLD

We also investigated the relationship among the number
of DCSI-UNet Params., floating-point operations per second
(FLOPs), and the F1 on the LEVIR-CD dataset for input
images of size 256 × 256 × 3, and presented it in Table III.
DCSI-UNet has exhibited superior performance, which can be
ascribed to the moderate complexity of its network structure.
By introducing feature interactions in both the channel and
spatial dimensions and enhancing the associations between the
aforementioned dual interactive features, we have increased
the number of Params. and computational complexity to a
certain extent, bringing about better performance and stronger
generalization ability.
C. Ablation Analysis
To further validate the rationality of our proposed network
and the contribution of each module to the network, we conducted comprehensive ablation experiments using the LEVIRCD dataset as an example, as shown in Tables IV–VIII,
to demonstrate the network’s performance under different
conditions.

1) Different Encoding Part Backbones: To evaluate the
impact of different backbones in the encoding part on method
performance, we conducted ablation experiments using backbones composed of ResConv, ResNet18 [48], ResNet34 [48],
ResNet50 [48], and ResNet101 [48]. In order to ensure

Authorized licensed use limited to: FUDAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 20,2026 at 11:28:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5601115

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 64, 2026

Fig. 7. Visualization of F1 with increasing number of epochs on the LEVIR-CD validation set. (a) Different nonweight-sharing encoding part backbones.
(b) Module ablation experiments under the encoding part backbone as a weight-sharing ResNet18. (c) Module ablation experiments under encoding part
backbone as nonweight-sharing ResConv structure.
TABLE VI

TABLE VII

Q UANTITATIVE A BLATION R ESULTS FOR THE N UMBER OF
C HANNEL S UBSPACES ON THE LEVIR-CD DATASET.
T HE B EST R ESULTS A RE IN B OLD

R ESULTS OF A BLATION E XPERIMENTS FOR W EIGHT A DAPTIVE P REDIC TION H EAD ON LEVIR-CD, W ITH “X” I NDICATING THE U SE OF THE
P REDICTED O UTPUT. T HE B EST R ESULTS A RE IN B OLD

the fairness and comprehensiveness of the experiments, pretrained weights are not loaded in all backbones, and both
weight-sharing and nonweight-sharing are considered. The
results of the experiments and the Params. of the method
are listed in Table IV. It is worth noting that while weightsharing provides better generalization in some cases, it may
restrict the extraction of certain unique features from images
[18]. Our proposed CGIM and SGAM consider the interaction
information between image pairs, thus integrating the semantic
feature representations of other inputs while preserving their
own features. The residual structure of ResConv is more
concise and does not use pretrained weights, which reduces the
discrepancy in feature distribution between potentially introduced image pretrained weights and RS images. Moreover,
ResConv is more compatible with the interaction mechanisms
of CGIM and SGAM, avoiding the restriction of complex
convolution blocks in ResNet18 on the interaction of dualtemporal features. Fig. 7(a) visualizes the accuracy of the
nonweight-sharing backbone on the validation set over epochs.
Based on the experimental results and considering the Params.
as well as the performance, we believe that nonweight-sharing
ResConv is a reasonable choice.
2) Module Verification: To validate the effectiveness of
various components and branches within DCSI-UNet, we
compared the F1 scores when using weight-sharing ResNet18
and nonweight-sharing ResConv as the backbones of the
encoding part in these two different scenarios. Through the
compatibility and actual efficacy of the modules under the two
different backbones and weight mechanisms, the effectiveness
and plug-and-play universality of the modules were verified.

TABLE VIII
A BLATION S TUDY OF L OSS F UNCTION C OEFFICIENTS ON LEVIR-CD.
T HE B EST R ESULTS A RE IN B OLD

The experimental results are presented in Table V. Fig. 7(b)
and (c) visualizes the changes in accuracy over epochs during
the validation process. The term “w/o” stands for “without,”
indicating that the corresponding modules in DCSI-UNet were
removed to assess their contributions to the method. The
“baseline” means removing all additional modules and relying
only on the basic framework. “w/o α1 α2 α3 ” indicates the
replacement of learnable Params. with a constant value of
1, evenly distributing output voting weights. Additionally,
we recorded the method Params. under different ablation
experiments.

Authorized licensed use limited to: FUDAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 20,2026 at 11:28:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: DUAL-STREAM UNet WITH PARALLEL CHANNEL–SPATIAL INTERACTION AND AGGREGATION

The experimental results demonstrate that each module
within DCSI-UNet exhibits favorable compatibility and practical efficacy. Specifically, in the absence of interaction modules,
the weight-sharing ResNet18 achieves superior performance in
terms of F1 score and generalization ability. However, upon
the introduction of interaction modules, the F1 score of the
nonweight-sharing ResConv increases significantly, showing
better overall generalization performance. We attribute this to
the more concise residual structure of ResConv, which mitigates the constraints imposed by complex convolutional blocks
on bitemporal feature interactions, enabling it to achieve
results comparable to ResNet18 with fewer Params.
a) Effectiveness of IAM: In order to analyze whether
IAM supports better overall network performance, we rely
only on the output of the first phase of the decoding part.
As shown in Table V, the removal of IAM resulted in a
significant performance drop compared to the original DCSIUNet, demonstrating the importance of aggregation between
channel and spatial interaction feature maps. As illustrated
in Fig. 7(b) and (c), the F1 of DCSI-UNet in both ablation
experiments outperforms the scenario without IAM, further
validating the importance of this module.
b) Effectiveness of CGIM and SGAM: To examine the
performance of our proposed CGIM and SGAM, we simply
replaced the interaction modules with elementwise subtraction
of bitemporal feature maps. As shown in Table V, the absence
of interaction between the bitemporal feature maps results in
a certain degree of performance degradation. Furthermore, the
introduction of each submodule, whether CGIM or SGAM,
strengthens the association between the bitemporal feature
maps, leading to significant performance improvements. The
simultaneous use of both modules in DCSI-UNet proves to be
more effective than using either module alone, as is visually
demonstrated in Fig. 7(b) and (c).
c) Effectiveness of Weight Adaptation: We designed the
weight adaptive prediction head to optimize method performance using learnable Params. This strategy automatically
adjusts the weight of each prediction output to improve overall
predictive performance. As expected, setting the learnable
Params. to a constant value of 1 led to a decline in the
network’s performance. The absence of a weight allocation
resulted in unsatisfactory F1, which convincingly demonstrates the effectiveness of our weight adaptive prediction
head.
3) Number of Channel Subspaces: In CGIM, the module
enables feature interaction across different channel subspaces,
yet the relationship between the number of subspaces and
performance remains unclear. We, thus, varied the number
of subspaces to explore its impact on overall network performance (Table VI). Results show that different numbers of
channel subspaces induce slight differences in computational
load and affect OA variably: too few subspaces disperse feature
associations excessively, causing all channel dimensions to be
considered collectively; too many result in individual channel
processing, leading to insufficient bitemporal image correlation
and hindering effective feature learning. Based on experiments,
setting the number of channel subspaces to 4 is appropriate.

5601115

4) Prediction Head Verification: The weight adaptive prediction head will adaptively adjust the weights between the
three decoded outputs Yc1 , Y s1 , and Yg according to the
task goal, and sum up the generated predicted outputs P1 ,
P2 , and P3 to get the exquisite CM by argmax operation.
In order to demonstrate the effectiveness of predicted outputs
on the performance of the method, we conducted sufficient
ablation experiments on combinations of P1 , P2 , and P3 . We
explore the impact on CM by combining different predicted
outputs, for example, using only P1 or using P1 and P2 (while
using only the loss term corresponding to them in the loss
function). A “X” indicates that the predicted output was used
and the results are shown in Table VII. According to the
results, using any of the predicted output alone to generate
CM yields good results, which proves the reliability of our
module and method. Using a combination of the two predictive
outputs can provide excellent performance enhancement. We
think the possible reason for this phenomenon is that the
CGIM and SGAM complement each other, while IAM can
also lead to better detection results due to the aggregation of
channel and spatial interaction feature information. The best
performance was obtained by using the full prediction outputs
to generate the CM; therefore, we believe that P1 , P2 , and
P3 are complementary and all of them can provide a positive
effect on the final CM, proving the effectiveness of the weight
adaptive prediction head.
5) Loss Function Parameter Analysis: In order to assess
the contribution of the predicted output to the loss function
and the reasonableness of its construction, while finding a set
of suitable parameter settings, we conducted a series of experiments. We conducted comprehensive ablation experiments on
the three hyperparameters λ1 , λ2 , and λ3 in the loss function
(32). The resultant metrics are presented in Table VIII and
the value of the three hyperparameters (λ1 , λ2 , and λ3 ) are
taken as the practical Params. We could see from the results
of the single branch loss (1, 0, 0), (0, 1, 0), and (0, 0, 1) that
the overall performance difference is relatively mild against
different settings of each loss item. Furthermore, the results
for the double branch loss (1, 1, 0), (1, 0, 1), (0, 1, 1),
and triple branch loss (1, 1, 1) confirm the validity of the
multibranch loss, while disabling any of the loss terms leads
to a degradation of the method’s performance. We add a third
loss term of 0.5 weight to the double branch loss, and then
form the three branch loss (0.5, 1, 1), (1, 0.5, 1), and (1, 1,
0.5), which further verifies the effectiveness of each loss term.
Based on these results, we conclude that the multibranch loss
strategy is beneficial for improving DCSI-UNet performance,
and we propose to set the Params. as λ1 = λ2 = λ3 = 1.
D. Heatmap Visualization
In order to visualize the feature maps of each phase in
DCSI-UNe and to present the effect of each module, we
selected a test example on LEVIR-CD. Through channelwise
visualization, we select representative heatmaps presented
in Fig. 8. Fig. 8(a) displays a pair of bitemporal inputs, Img1
and Img2 . First, the bitemporal feature maps F1l and F2l in
Fig. 8(b) and (c) are extracted by ResConv and downsampling
operations, capturing regions with significant features. Then,

Authorized licensed use limited to: FUDAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 20,2026 at 11:28:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5601115

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 64, 2026

Fig. 8. Heatmap visualization using the LEVIR-CD test set as an example. (a) Bitemporal image input. (b) and (c) Bitemporal feature maps F1l and F2l .
(d) Interaction feature maps Fcl generated by CGIM. (e) Interaction feature maps F sl generated by SGAM. (f) and (g) Decoded outputs Ycl and Y sl by
skip connections. (h) Interaction feature aggregated output Yg obtained through IAM. (i) Predicted outputs P1 , P2 , and P3 . (j) Output of the weight adaptive
prediction head. (k) Change map.

CGIM and SGAM are used to enhance the channel and
spatial interactions between bitemporal feature maps to get the
corresponding interaction feature maps Fcl and F sl in Fig. 8(d)
and (e). The visualized heatmap shows that, due to the use of
channel and spatial interactive attention, the attention of the
DCSI-UNet is directed to the region where the real change
is occurring, while task-irrelevant distractions are suppressed.
This provides reliable detail difference characteristics and
rich edge textures for subsequent decoding and change map
generation, proving the effectiveness of CGIM and SGAM for
extracting difference features. Then, by skip connections generating Ycl and Y sl in Fig. 8(f) and (g), the abstract deep-layer
interaction feature maps are combined with relatively shallowlayer interaction feature maps to identify areas of change in
a more fine-grained way. Concurrently, we introduce IAM
to progressively aggregate semantic features and localization
details of multilayer channel and spatial interaction feature
maps to produce the excellent feature map Yg in Fig. 8(h). The
predicted outputs P1 , P2 , and P3 in Fig. 8(i) show excellent
visualization. The output of the weight adaptive prediction
head in Fig. 8(j) shows more accurate regions of change and
refinement of edges, which further proves the effectiveness of
DCSI-UNet.
V. C ONCLUSION
This article introduces a DCSI-UNet for CD. This method
addresses the problem of insufficient feature map interaction
in the encoding phase by constructing two plug-and-play
interaction modules, CGIM and SGAM, and designs an IAM
to enhance the aggregation between multilayer channel and
spatial interaction features. Specifically, CGIM allocates attention to changed regions in the channel dimension by dividing
the feature map into multiple channel subspaces and applying
MCIS to enhance the channel correlation of the feature map
within the subspaces. SGAM calculates the mixed mean and
joint variance of bitemporal feature maps and integrates them

into the designed GAK to enhance the hidden difference
features of bitemporal feature maps. Furthermore, we develop
an IAM to obtain the association between different interaction
features by aggregating the interaction feature maps generated by CGIM and SGAM from different layers. Compared
with existing mainstream CD methods, experiments verify the
effectiveness and superiority of the proposed method in terms
of quality evaluation and ablation studies.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to sincerely thank Daudt et al. [14],
Fang et al. [15], Chen et al. [16], Feng et al. [17], Lei et al.
[18], Han et al. [19], Feng et al. [20], Noman et al. [21], and
Huang et al. [22] for providing their codes, and the anonymous
reviewers for their constructive comments on this article.
R EFERENCES
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]

[7]
[8]

C. Marin, F. Bovolo, and L. Bruzzone, “Building change detection in
multitemporal very high resolution SAR images,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 53, no. 5, pp. 2664–2682, May 2015.
G. Pozoukidou and Z. Chatziyiannaki, “15-minute city: Decomposing
the new urban planning eutopia,” Sustainability, vol. 13, no. 2, p. 928,
Jan. 2021.
J. Weichselgartner and P. Pigeon, “The role of knowledge in disaster
risk reduction,” Int. J. Disaster Risk Sci., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 107–116,
Jun. 2015.
˜ “Looking back and beyond sendai: 25 years of international
S. Briceno,
policy experience on disaster risk reduction,” Int. J. Disaster Risk Sci.,
vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 1–7, Mar. 2015.
J. Rogan and D. Chen, “Remote sensing technology for mapping and
monitoring land-cover and land-use change,” Prog. Planning, vol. 61,
no. 4, pp. 301–325, May 2004.
H. Long, Y. Li, Y. Liu, M. Woods, and J. Zou, “Accelerated restructuring
in rural China fueled by ‘increasing vs. decreasing balance’ land-use
policy for dealing with hollowed villages,” Land Use Policy, vol. 29,
no. 1, pp. 11–22, Jan. 2012.
H. Chen, W. Li, and Z. Shi, “Adversarial instance augmentation for
building change detection in remote sensing images,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, pp. 1–16, 2022.
Y. Liu, C. Pang, Z. Zhan, X. Zhang, and X. Yang, “Building change
detection for remote sensing images using a dual-task constrained deep
Siamese convolutional network model,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens.
Lett., vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 811–815, May 2021.

Authorized licensed use limited to: FUDAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 20,2026 at 11:28:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: DUAL-STREAM UNet WITH PARALLEL CHANNEL–SPATIAL INTERACTION AND AGGREGATION

[9]

P. Coppin, I. Jonckheere, K. Nackaerts, B. Muys, and E. Lambin,
“Review ArticleDigital change detection methods in ecosystem monitoring: A review,” Int. J. Remote Sens., vol. 25, no. 9, pp. 1565–1596,
May 2004.
[10] J. Chen, P. Gong, C. He, R. Pu, and P. Shi, “Land-use/land-cover change
detection using improved change-vector analysis,” Photogrammetric
Eng. Remote Sens., vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 369–379, Apr. 2003.
[11] T. Celik, “Unsupervised change detection in satellite images using
principal component analysis and k-means clustering,” IEEE Geosci.
Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 772–776, Oct. 2009.
[12] L. I. Kuncheva and W. J. Faithfull, “PCA feature extraction for change
detection in multidimensional unlabeled data,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw.
Learn. Syst., vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 69–80, Jan. 2014.
[13] L. T. Luppino, F. M. Bianchi, G. Moser, and S. N. Anfinsen,
“Unsupervised image regression for heterogeneous change detection,”
2019, arXiv:1909.05948.
[14] R. C. Daudt, B. Le Saux, and A. Boulch, “Fully convolutional Siamese
networks for change detection,” in Proc. 25th IEEE Int. Conf. Image
Process. (ICIP), Oct. 2018, pp. 4063–4067.
[15] S. Fang, K. Li, J. Shao, and Z. Li, “SNUNet-CD: A densely connected
Siamese network for change detection of VHR images,” IEEE Geosci.
Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 19, pp. 1–5, 2022.
[16] H. Chen, Z. Qi, and Z. Shi, “Remote sensing image change detection with transformers,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60,
pp. 1–14, 2022.
[17] Y. Feng, H. Xu, J. Jiang, H. Liu, and J. Zheng, “ICIF-Net: Intra-scale
cross-interaction and inter-scale feature fusion network for bitemporal
remote sensing images change detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 4410213.
[18] T. Lei et al., “Ultralightweight spatial–spectral feature cooperation
network for change detection in remote sensing images,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 4402114.
[19] C. Han, C. Wu, H. Guo, M. Hu, and H. Chen, “HANet: A hierarchical
attention network for change detection with bitemporal very-highresolution remote sensing images,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth
Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 16, pp. 3867–3878, 2023.
[20] Y. Feng, J. Jiang, H. Xu, and J. Zheng, “Change detection on remote
sensing images using dual-branch multilevel intertemporal network,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 4401015.
[21] M. Noman, M. Fiaz, H. Cholakkal, S. Khan, and F. S. Khan, “ELGCNet: Efficient local–global context aggregation for remote sensing
change detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024,
Art. no. 4701611.
[22] Y. Huang, X. Li, Z. Du, and H. Shen, “Spatiotemporal enhancement and
interlevel fusion network for remote sensing images change detection,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5609414.
[23] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox, “U-Net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image segmentation,” in Proc. 18th Int. Conf. Med.
Image Comput. Comput.-Assist. Intervent., vol. 9351. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2015, pp. 234–241.
[24] Z. Zhou, M. M. R. Siddiquee, N. Tajbakhsh, and J. Liang, “UNet+:
A nested U-Net architecture for medical image segmentation,” in Proc.
Deep Learn. Med. Image Anal. Multimodal Learn. Clin. Decis. Support,
vol. 11045, Sep. 2018, pp. 3–11.
[25] S. Woo, J. Park, J. Lee, and I. S. Kweon, “CBAM: Convolutional block
attention module,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV), 2018,
pp. 3–19.
[26] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
Syst., vol. 30, pp. 5998–6008, 2025.
[27] W. G. C. Bandara and V. M. Patel, “A transformer-based Siamese
network for change detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Geosci. Remote Sens.
Symp., Jul. 2022, pp. 207–210.
[28] C. Zhang, L. Wang, S. Cheng, and Y. Li, “SwinSUNet: Pure transformer
network for remote sensing image change detection,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5224713.
[29] R. Strudel, R. Garcia, I. Laptev, and C. Schmid, “Segmenter: Transformer for semantic segmentation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf.
Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2021, pp. 7262–7272.
[30] Y. Mo, Y. Wu, X. Yang, F. Liu, and Y. Liao, “Review the state-ofthe-art technologies of semantic segmentation based on deep learning,”
Neurocomputing, vol. 493, pp. 626–646, Jul. 2022.
[31] Q. Xu, K. Chen, X. Sun, Y. Zhang, H. Li, and G. Xu, “Pseudo-Siamese
capsule network for aerial remote sensing images change detection,”
IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 19, pp. 1–5, 2022.
[32] S. Hafner, A. Nascetti, H. Azizpour, and Y. Ban, “Sentinel-1 and
Sentinel-2 data fusion for urban change detection using a dual stream
U-Net,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 19, pp. 1–5,2022.

5601115

[33] Q. Xu, K. Chen, G. Zhou, and X. Sun, “Change capsule network for
optical remote sensing image change detection,” Remote Sens., vol. 13,
no. 14, p. 2646, Jul. 2021.
[34] X. Zhang, L. Wang, and S. Cheng, “A multiscale cascaded crossattention hierarchical network for change detection on bitemporal remote
sensing images,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art.
no. 2002216.
[35] C. Zhang et al., “A deeply supervised image fusion network for
change detection in high resolution bi-temporal remote sensing
images,” ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens., vol. 166, pp. 183–200,
Aug. 2020.
[36] J. Chen et al., “DASNet: Dual attentive fully convolutional Siamese
networks for change detection in high-resolution satellite images,” IEEE
J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 14, pp. 1194–1206,
2021.
[37] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “ImageNet classification
with deep convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., vol. 60, 2017, pp. 84–90.
[38] R. Girshick, J. Donahue, T. Darrell, and J. Malik, “Rich feature
hierarchies for accurate object detection and semantic segmentation,”
in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2014,
pp. 580–587.
[39] C.-F. R. Chen, Q. Fan, and R. Panda, “CrossViT: Cross-attention multiscale vision transformer for image classification,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2021, pp. 357–366.
[40] S. Zheng et al., “Rethinking semantic segmentation from a sequenceto-sequence perspective with transformers,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2021, pp. 6881–6890.
[41] Y. Lee, J. Kim, J. Willette, and S. J. Hwang, “MPViT: Multi-path vision
transformer for dense prediction,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2022, pp. 7277–7286.
[42] N. Carion, F. Massa, G. Synnaeve, N. Usunier, A. Kirillov, and
S. Zagoruyko, “End-to-end object detection with transformers,” in
Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2020,
pp. 213–229.
[43] X. Zhu, W. Su, L. Lu, B. Li, X. Wang, and J. Dai, “Deformable
DETR: Deformable transformers for end-to-end object detection,” 2020,
arXiv:2010.04159.
[44] Y. Shang, J. Liu, J. Yang, and Z. Wu, “A model-inspired approach
with transformers for hyperspectral pansharpening,” IEEE J. Sel.
Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 15, pp. 7187–7202,
2022.
[45] X. Chen, X. Wang, J. Zhou, Y. Qiao, and C. Dong, “Activating more
pixels in image super-resolution transformer,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2023, pp. 22367–22377.
[46] Y. Shang, J. Liu, J. Zhang, and Z. Wu, “MFT-GAN: A multiscale feature-guided transformer network for unsupervised hyperspectral
pansharpening,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art.
no. 5518516.
[47] W. Liu, Y. Lin, W. Liu, Y. Yu, and J. Li, “An attention-based
multiscale transformer network for remote sensing image change
detection,” ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens., vol. 202, pp. 599–609,
Aug. 2023.
[48] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image
recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun.
2016, pp. 770–778.
[49] G. S. Watson, “Smooth regression analysis,” Sankhyä Indian J. Statist.,
A, vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 359–372, 1964.
´ A. Nadaraya, “On estimating regression,” Theory Probab. Appl.,
[50] E.
vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 141–142, 1964.
[51] S. S. Keerthi and C.-J. Lin, “Asymptotic behaviors of support vector machines with Gaussian kernel,” Neural Comput., vol. 15, no. 7,
pp. 1667–1689, Jul. 2003.
[52] G. Cheng, G. Wang, and J. Han, “ISNet: Towards improving separability
for remote sensing image change detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5623811.
[53] K. Jiang, J. Liu, W. Zhang, F. Liu, and L. Xiao, “MANet: An efficient multidimensional attention-aggregated network for remote sensing
image change detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61,
2023, Art. no. 4706118.
[54] H. Chen and Z. Shi, “A spatial–temporal attention-based method and a
new dataset for remote sensing image change detection,” Remote Sens.,
vol. 12, no. 10, p. 1662, May 2020.
[55] S. Ji, S. Wei, and M. Lu, “Fully convolutional networks for multisource
building extraction from an open aerial and satellite imagery data set,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 574–586, Jan.
2019.

Authorized licensed use limited to: FUDAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 20,2026 at 11:28:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

