CoordGate: Efficiently Computing Spatially-Varying Convolutions in Convolutional
Neural Networks
Sunny Howard,1, 2, ∗ Peter Norreys,1, 3 and Andreas Döpp1, 2, †
1

arXiv:2401.04680v1 [cs.CV] 9 Jan 2024

Department of Physics, Clarendon Laboratory, University of Oxford,
Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3PU, United Kingdom
2
Faculty of Physics, Ludwig–Maximilians–Universität München, Am Coulombwall 1, 85748 Garching, Germany
3
John Adams Institute for Accelerator Science, Denys Wilkinson Building, Oxford OX1 3RH, United Kingdom
Optical imaging systems are inherently limited in their resolution due to the point spread function (PSF), which applies a static, yet spatially-varying, convolution to the image. This degradation
can be addressed via Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), particularly through deblurring techniques. However, current solutions face certain limitations in efficiently computing spatially-varying
convolutions. In this paper we propose CoordGate, a novel lightweight module that uses a multiplicative gate and a coordinate encoding network to enable efficient computation of spatially-varying
convolutions in CNNs. CoordGate allows for selective amplification or attenuation of filters based
on their spatial position, effectively acting like a locally connected neural network. The effectiveness
of the CoordGate solution is demonstrated within the context of U-Nets and applied to the challenging problem of image deblurring. The experimental results show that CoordGate outperforms
conventional approaches, offering a more robust and spatially aware solution for CNNs in various
computer vision applications.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Convolution is a fundamental operation that lies at the
core of methods from numerous disciplines, from physical
processes like heat transfer, to convolutional neural networks in machine learning. In an optics context, this operation involves sliding a point spread function (PSF) - a
system’s response to a point source - over an input signal
in order to obtain the convolved signal. While classical
convolution requires a PSF that is spatially-invariant (i.e.
no change as it is passed over the input), this is a property that is rarely found in reality, due to, for example,
optical aberrations. When one considers a convolution
with a spatially-variant PSF, the expressability of the
operation becomes even greater. However, with greater
functionality, comes greater computational complexity.
Discretised spatially-varying convolution is described by
the general formula,
n(i) =

X

h(i, j)m(j),

(1)

j∈Ω(i)

where m and n are the input and convolved signals, h
is the point spread function, i is a position, and Ω(i) describes a relevant region around i (which may include the
full domain of n). Classic, spatially-invariant, convolution enforces that h(i, j) = h(i − j).
When imaging an object, a PSF is known to be dependant on the in-plane spatial coordinates, (x, y), as well
as the angles of incidence, θ (or equivalently depth, z).
Using a typical single two-dimensional (2D) sensor does

∗ sunny.howard@physics.ox.ac.uk
† a.doepp@physik.uni-muenchen.de

not allow access to the latter variable, which leads to deconvolution becoming underdetermined. Here, a static
spatially-varying convolution is defined as one where the
PSF is consistent for every data sample and depends only
on the in-plane coordinates, so that the other degree of
freedom is removed. Such a condition is satisfied in many
scenarios in optics; for example, when imaging at a fixed
depth (z(x, y) = C(x, y)), such as in microscopy or in relay imaging, or at very far distances (θ → 0), such as in
astronomy. The aforementioned definition also typically
removes examples that include motion blur, which would
not be static between data samples. Finally, one notes
that the (pseudo-)inversion of a static convolution gives
rise to a static spatially-varying deconvolution, which
in a noise-free case is totally determined. This paper
focuses on the problem of performing static spatiallyvarying convolution and deconvolution.
Recent efforts in these problems have turned to deep
learning methods, such as convolutional neural networks
(CNNs). CNN’s are composed of convolutional layers, which have the typically desirable characteristic of
weight-sharing - significantly reducing the number of
trainable parameters in the network and allowing for efficient position-independent extraction of local features
from images. By sequentially stacking convolutional layers, CNNs extract highly abstract features, whilst also
widening their receptive field. However, the property of
weight-sharing also imposes a constraint on the model’s
ability to learn spatially-aware representations. While
CNNs can actually detect spatially varying features,1
the method of how they do this is inefficient, as will be
described in subsequent sections of this paper. Several
methods have been suggested to improve CNN’s spatial
capabilities, one of which is the CoordConv layer,2 which
appends coordinates to the input features, enabling the
network to learn spatial-aware representations.
In this paper, we revisit the problem of CNNs’ ineffi-

2
ciency in spatial awareness and propose a novel solution,
CoordGate. While CoordConv appends the coordinates
to the data before convolution, in CoordGate they are
passed through an encoder network, before being applied
to the convolved data via a multiplication gate, similar
to that found in a channel-attention mechanism. This
technique enables selective amplification or attenuation
of filters based on their spatial position, and it provides
a large efficiency increase over existing CNNs. The paper is structured as follows: In Section II, a discussion
is provided on the state of the art regarding spatially
varying convolutions in CNN architectures and relevant
related work is highlighted. This section serves as a basis
for the subsequent introduction of the proposed solution
in Section III and experimental results are provided in
Section IV. Section V summarizes the new findings and
concludes the paper.

II.

STATE OF THE ART AND RELATED WORK

Boundary Effects. Standard CNNs inadvertently
leverage spatial variance due to padding effects.1,3 It is
common to pad the input to a convolutional layer with
zeros before passing the kernel over it (‘same’ padding),
as this maintains the spatial size of the image. Post
convolution, a systematic defect appears around the
feature map’s boundary, which seeps inwards with each
subsequent convolutional layer. This effect is observable
in Fig. 1(a), where a (12 × 12) uniform input is convolved
with a (3 × 3) uniform kernel using ‘same’ padding. The
resultant feature map displays the position-encoding
effect propagating inward. A different kernel would
disrupt symmetry in these maps. A network cannot
detect spatial variance in a region until the defect reaches
it; this is visible in the central region of Fig. 1((a) that
retains a uniform value. In a standard computer vision
task with an input size of ∼ 500 × 500, a significant
number of 3 × 3 convolutions are needed to reach the
center. Using encoder-decoder architectures like U-Net4
can alleviate this issue. Convoluting at the downsampled
layer in U-Net helps encode positional information in
fewer steps, but at a downsampled resolution, as shown
in Fig. 1(b-c). Thus, for U-Net to exploit positional
information, it is necessary for the network to be deep
and it may require a large number of channels to
describe more complicated positional relationships. This
unintended positional encoding of padding contributes
to deep CNN’s performance in spatial tasks, but it
encourages exploration of more deliberate encoding
methods for potentially higher accuracy and efficiency.
Adaptive Convolution. It is possible to adapt a classic convolution in order to give it some spatial variance.
One of the simplest methods in this class is the CoordConv layer, which concatenates normalized spatial coordinates to the input features before they are passed
through a convolution, aiming to allow the network to

learn spatially-aware representations more explicitly,2
and it has been adopted for various applications.5–10 In
the case of static spatially-varying convolution, one desires that the coordinate information affects the feature
map in the same way for every data sample. Throughout
the training set, the values of data will vary, while the
value of the coordinates will be static. CoordConv layers
include the coordinate within a weighted sum with the
data values which makes it impossible to find weights for
a convolutional kernel that will allow the coordinates to
effect each sample in the same way. This is a fundamental
limitation of CoordConv.
Another method trying to address this issue is the
pixel-adaptive convolution (PAC).11 In this method, the
actual convolution function is multiplied by a pairwise
function of pixel features (such as the coordinates). However, in PAC, the pairwise function has a fixed parametric form, such as a Gaussian, which limits this techniques generalisability, as a certain choice of function may
not suit all problems. A spatially-varying optical PSF is
nearly always smoothly changing, and can be represented
as a superposition of a small number of kernels. For this
reason, there is no need to introduce an expensive pairwise operation, if a more desirable light-weight method
is able to simply interpolate between the kernels. The
proposed method is based on this simplification, and enables easier training and faster inference. Furthermore,
being a modification of the convolution itself, PAC cannot take advantage of hardware acceleration for standard
convolutions.
For the sake of completeness one should also mention
the arguably most general case of an adaptive convolution, the locally-connected network (LCN).12 Here, each
position uses its own kernel to connect to a region in
the feature map. Unfortunately, this flexibility comes
at a price and LCNs require a much larger number of
parameters than CNNs, which requires more memory,
makes them prone to overfitting and harder to train.
Furthermore, similarly to pixel-adaptive convolution,
these networks cannot use the GPU-level optimization
of pure convolutions and thus, are significantly slower to
execute than deep CNNs.
Attention. Finally, a brief description is provided for
the attention mechanism, which bares some similarity to
the proposed method and has received significant recent
interest in computer vision.13–15 Attention acts on an input vector v to give an output vector z, and its general
form is given by,
z = f (g(v), v),

(2)

where g is a function to generate the attention, and f
applies the attention to v. Common forms of f include
element-wise multiplication, weighted sum, or concatenation, while g can be a simple linear transformation, a
neural network, or even a more complex function. A popular evolution of the method, self-attention, refers to the
case where the generator function depends on pairwise

3

FIG. 1: The position encoding effects from ‘same’ padding. (a): Convolving a uniform input with a 3 × 3 uniform
kernel 5 times. (b&c): The same effect for 2 U-Net architectures, containing 2 and 4 steps of down-and-up sampling
respectively. Before each dimension-changing operation, three 3 × 3 convolutions were applied, except for the middle
layer in (b), where 12 additional convolutions were applied so each model had the same total number of convolutions.

function of elements of v. When used as spatial attention, this addresses a limitation of the receptive fields of
convolutions, and has thus received use in computer vision in order to capture non-local features.16 One method
utilised self attention for image recognition,6 and also applied a CoordConv inspired technique of concatenating
the coordinates to the feature map.

III.

PROPOSED METHOD

As has been discussed above, current methods either
rely on (indirect) modification of the convolution kernel,
on concatenating a coordinate map that acts as additional weight, or on the use of an attention mechanism.
The proposed method takes inspiration from these approaches, but condenses them into a lightweight module, which is ideally suited for applications such as static
spatially-varying convolution in optical imaging.

In the convolutional CoordGate module (see Fig. 2),
the input, x ∈ Rnx ×ny ×nc , is first fed through a standard
convolutional block, h, with the final layer containing nlc
output channels. As discussed previously, these channels
correspond to globally applied convolutions. To synthesize a locally-varying convolution from these, the output
channels are then multiplied with a gating mask of the
same size, somewhat similar to an attention map. However, in contrast to attention that is based on the input
signal, here we create the gating mask by taking a static
coordinate map, C ∈ Rnx ×ny ×2 , as in CoordConv, and
feeding it through a pixel-wise fully-connected encoding
network, g, with the last layer containing nlc neurons.
If one is using residual learning, a final 1 × 1 convolutional layer can be used to yield an output with the
original number of channels. Denoting an index of the
two-dimensional arrays with the vector i, and the channel slice of the resultant vector, y, with a, CoordGate is
described by,
yi,a = (h(x)i · g (Ci ))a .

FIG. 2: CoordGate. The data, X, and coordinates, C,
are fed through a CNN and a MLP respectively, before
the Hadamard product is used between the resultant
tensors.

(3)

The intuition behind the method is as follows. The convolutional network h(x) can learn a wide range of resultant kernels, and stores nlc different ones in the channels
of its feature map. If the network includes downsampling
and upsampling, such as the U-Net, these kernels can be
very large and encorperate non-local features. In order to
selectively attenuate filters, adopting a different resultant
convolution for each pixel, the feature map is multiplied
by the channel-wise attention generated from the coordinates. In other words, the feature channels form a basis
whose amplitudes at each position are encoded in the
gating map. Importantly, the encoding network g(Ci ) is
only dependent on the coordinates and once trained, one
directly saves the parameters of the gating map. As a
result, during inference the only computational overhead
compared to a standard convolution is an element-wise
multiplication.
The previously discussed zero-padding boundary effects can also be seen as a position-encoded multiplica-

4
tion operation. A 3×3 kernel being passed over an image
will include 3 pixels of 0 when at the boundary (assuming
it is not in a corner); accordingly, the corresponding pixel
in the feature map will have an average relative magnitude of 32 compared to a pixel in the center. This effect
propagates inwards with successive convolutions and the
proposed method involves a more deliberate and efficient
use of this desirable property of multiplication.
Also note that one could, in principle, remove the position decoder network and make the gating map directly
trainable. However, this would not only result in a much
larger amount of parameters for the network that will
complicate training, but more importantly it would ignore the fact that many systems exhibiting a spatiallyvarying convolution vary smoothly over the input space
and hence, can be parameterized. One might further
note that, interestingly, if one were to train the map directly, and the kernels within the convolutional layer form
a complete base, this method becomes equally expressive
as a locally-connected neural network with shared bias
term.

IV.

EXPERIMENTS

Here the proposed method is implemented to find solutions to a number of problems. Firstly the trivial example
of performing 1D spatially-varying convolution is considered, in order to clearly demonstrate the technique’s effectiveness compared to common alternatives. Secondly,
the method is applied to the practical problem of image
deblurring (2D spatially-varying deconvolution).

A.

Learning 1D spatially-varying convolutions

Eq. (1) can be rewritten as the following matrix multiplication,
⃗n = Hm,
⃗

(4)

where for the 1D case, m
⃗ and ⃗n are the original and convolved data, and H is the convolution matrix. Note that
in the case of a spatially invariant convolution, H has
the form of a Toeplitz matrix, and can be approximated
perfectly by a single-channel convolutional layer with a
suitable kernel size.
Here, 10000 normalized uniform random samples of
size (30) are generated for m,
⃗ before being multiplied
with a custom convolution matrix H to give ⃗n. The task
of the network is to predict ⃗n given m,
⃗ thus approximating H. The proposed method is benchmarked against
a number of convolutional architectures, demonstrating
their limitations. Each network is trained to convergence
using the Adam optimizer17 (with default parameters) to
minimize the mean squared error (MSE).
A convolutional neural network is denoted by
CNN(L, k, c), containing L convolutional layers with a

kernel size of k with c channels, except from the last
layer which has 1 channel. A convolutional model utilising CoordConv layers is denoted by cCNN(L, k, c) and
the CoordGate architecture is denoted by CG(L, k, c, p),
where L, k, c describe the parameters of the convolutional
network, and p describes the number of fully connected
layers to encode the coordinates, each with c nodes. The
custom convolution matrix consists of a Gaussian for each
pixel, with varying offset, δ(x′ ), and standard deviation,
σ(x′ ), as described by the following equation and shown
in shown in Fig. 3,

H(x, x′ ) = e

−(x−δ(x′ ))2
2σ(x′ )2

(
(δ(x′ ), σ(x′ )) =

,

x
(1 − 15
, 0.5),
x
x
) + 2(1 − 15
)),
(0, 0.5(2 − 15

if x < 15
.
otherwise
(5)

Discussion. The graph in Fig. 3 displays the peak signal to noise ratio (PSNR), defined as 10 × log10 ( M 1SE ),
against the inference time for each model. Beginning
with the CNNs, the simple case of a single convolutional layer is intuitive, with the network learning the
mean kernel. One then sees an increase in performance
with successive layers added. This is explained by the
padding effects described earlier, and is seen between
the CNN(3,7,4) and CNN(4,7,4) plots, where the boundary is moving down the image, allowing the network to
learn spatially variant information in that region, whilst
it learns the mean for the rest. This propagation of spatial information is also seen for CNN(8,7,4). The comparison of CNN(4,7,4) and CNN(4,7,20) demonstrates that
adding more channels does not help the model to learn
spatially varying features. The CoordConv model possesses no benefit over a standard convolutional model in
this task - in fact, studying the convolutional kernel, the
model tries to discard the effect of coordinate layer. On
the contrary, the model utilising CoordGate learns the
convolution matrix using one single convolutional layer,
with signicantly less inference time and a fraction of the
number of parameters required by a convolutional model.
The convolution matrix can be thought of as a superposition between 3 gaussian kernels: (δ = 1, σ = 0.5),(δ = 0,
σ = 0.5) and (δ = 0, σ = 2), so it is intuitive that the
CoordGate model required 3 channels in order to interpolate between them. Also tested was the case when
instead of coordinates, the static variable was initialised
as random numbers (U(−1, 1)), which was found to not
converge, highlighting the use of the coordinates.
Futhermore, the CoordGate method scales much better with increasing sample size, or with reduced kernel
size, as it does not require subsequent convolutions to
encode the position.

5

FIG. 3: Showing the approximations of the convolution matrix by different models. Also shown is a plot of PSNR
against inference time for each model, with the spot size being proportional to the number of parameters in the
model.

B.

Image deblurring

Image deblurring is an example of a spatially-variant
deconvolution. Of the different possible types of blur,
many are dynamic - that is, they may vary from image to image - including things like motion blur. Here
we consider a static blur, solely originating from imperfections in the imaging system. This is a problem that
has received interest in fields such as microscopy18,19 and
astronomy,20,21 and an effective image deblurrer could
also be used to sharpen images from an imperfect relay
imaging system.22
The U-Net is well suited to spatially-varying deconvolution due to its ability to synthesise resultant kernels with wide receptive fields, which helps with two
problems; firstly, deconvolution typically requires a much
wider receptive field than convolution, due to a more
non-local resultant kernel (which theoretically spans the
whole image due to mixing, but can be approximated
with a smaller kernel). Secondly, as has already been
discussed, in order to capture spatially varying features
throughout the image, the zero-padding defect must be
propagated to the center. This second condition requires
the U-Net to be very deep, as is seen in Fig. 1, which adds
a large number of parameters (as typically the number
of channels increases with depth). Here, we hypothesise that adding CoordGate to the model will allow for a
more efficient extraction of spatially-varying behaviour,
and thus allow a much shallower U-Net to be able to
achieve equal performance, with a fraction of the parameters.
Multiple U-Nets are used, and an architecture with
depth d is denoted as U-Net(d). The form of these models is seen in Fig. 4(a). In every step there are two 3 × 3
convolutions with the rectified linear unit activation func-

tion (ReLU) applied.23 To test CoordGate’s effectiveness
in this scenario, it is added to both the most shallow and
deep U-Nets at each down-or-up sampling point. Furthermore, we also compare CoordGate to CoordConvUNet,8 and a state-of-the-art method in this setting of
image deblurring from a static point spread function,
named MultiWienerNet.18 This technique first requires
the measurement of the PSF at a number of locations
across the sensor (which represents an inconvenience not
required for CoordGate). Then Wiener deconvolution is
performed each of these PSFs, resulting in a number of
feature maps that are relatively unblurred in the positions of where each PSF was measured. Finally, a U-Net
is used to combine and refine these maps to give the
prediction. One notes that the MultiWienerNet was developed in the setting where the PSF varies very quickly
(to be used with compressed sensing24 ), whereas here we
consider a PSF of a typical lens. Both CoordConv-UNet
and MultiWienerNet were implemented with the deepest
U-Net architecture, U-Net(6).
Here we utilise the database of microscopy images of
live cells collected from multiple sources.25,26 A synthetic
PSF was applied to each of the 20000 samples, with
defocus increasing towards the edge of the image to try
and simulate a realistic lens, which is seen in Fig. 5. The
job of a model, is to recover the original unblurred image
from its blurred counterpart. Each model was trained
with the Adam optimizer for 600 epochs. The initial
learning rate was 0.001, and was halved if the validation
loss didn’t decrease over 20 epochs. An example of a
reconstruction is shown in Fig. 5.
Discussion. Fig. 4((b) shows the validation PSNR of
each trained model against the number of parameters.
Comparing the different U-Net architectures, one sees

6

FIG. 4: (a): The backbone U-Net architecture. A model with depth, d, has nc [d] channels in its deepest layer. The
yellow CoordGate arrows are added for the CG U-Net(d) models. (b): A plot of PSNR against the logarithm of the
number of parameters, demonstrating the advantage of adding CoordGate to the U-Net architecture. Also included
are the CoordConv-UNet and MultiWienerNet models.

FIG. 5: An example showing the blurring and subsequent de-blurring process using our CoordGate technique.

that the PSNR increases with depth, as expected due
to the increased capacity to represent spatially-varying
features that has been described previously. The form of
the PSF includes a region of focus in the center, which
explains why U-Net(6) performs only marginally better
than U-Net(5), as the latter model can still represent this
section well with the average kernel.
The addition of CoordGate causes a large increase
in performance and efficiency. In fact, upon the implementation of CoordGate, the most shallow model
(CG U-Net(3)) is able to outperform the deepest normal model (U-Net(6)), despite the fact that it contains
60× less parameters. The deeper model has much more
capacity to synthesise bigger kernels, which gives it a
natural advantage, and thus the fact that it is outperformed, shows that CoordGate is superior in learning the
spatially-varying features. This claim is supported by
studying the average loss over all examples, which shows
a significantly lower loss close to the center of the image for CoordGate. Finally, one notes that CG U-Net(6)
performs better than CG U-Net(3), which is explainable
by the fact that it can synthesise wider kernels, therefore better approximating the true global deconvolution

kernels.
It was found that the CoordConv-UNet model performed nearly identically to the base U-Net(6) model,
suggesting that the concatenation operation doesn’t provide the coordinate information to the network in an optimum way. The incorporation of Wiener deconvolution
in MultiWienerNet resulted in a significant performance
increase over the base U-Net. However, it must be remembered that this model is given more information, in
the form of some prior measurements of the PSF. Even
so, it is outperformed by the shallower CoordGate model,
despite containing significantly more parameters. Experiments with varying the size of the fully connected layer
are included in the supplemental material, along with
additional metrics.

V.

CONCLUSION

This paper has introduced a new method, CoordGate,
to allow for more efficient and accurate spatially-varying
convolution and deconvolution. The technique works by
multiplying the output of a CNN by a gating map, that

7
is generated by an pixel-wise coordinate-encoding network, thereby selectively attenuating the resultant convolutional kernels for each pixel. CoordGate can be seen
as lightweight in two ways. Firstly, the implementation
itself adds minimal parameters to the existing model.
Secondly, the addition of CoordGate allows a much simpler backbone network to achieve a superior performance
than that of a more relatively complex model, as has been
proven in the experiments.

CoordConv-UNet in terms of outright accuracy and efficiency. Further work should involve the implementation
of the CoordGate module to different models and problems; in particular the authors plan to use CoordGate to
mitigate imperfections in the relay system of a snapshot
compressive imaging apparatus.22

CoordGate’s utility was first verified on the simple
case of 1D convolution, before being applied to a more
challenging problem of removing a spatially-varying blur
caused by a lens. In the latter, adding CoordGate
modules to a shallow U-Net architecture enabled it to
achieve a higher accuracy than a much deeper U-Net architecture, despite having almost two order of magnitude less parameters. For this problem, CoordGate also
outperformed two recent methods MultiWienerNet and

We would like to acknowledge the useful discussions
with Dr. Ramy Aboushelbaya and the rest of Professor Peter Norreys’ group, as well as the members of the
DOLPHIN group at LMU’s Centre for Advanced Laser
Applications. This work was supported by the Independent Junior Research Group “Characterization and control of high-intensity laser pulses for particle acceleration”, DFG Project No. 453619281. We would also like
to acknowledge UKRI-STFC grant ST/V001655/1.

[1] O. S. Kayhan and J. C. van Gemert, “On translation
invariance in cnns: Convolutional layers can exploit absolute spatial location,” in 2020 IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
(Los Alamitos, CA, USA), pp. 14262–14273, IEEE Computer Society, jun 2020.
[2] R. Liu, J. Lehman, P. Molino, F. Petroski Such, E. Frank,
A. Sergeev, and J. Yosinski, “An intriguing failing of
convolutional neural networks and the coordconv solution,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (S. Bengio, H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, K. Grauman,
N. Cesa-Bianchi, and R. Garnett, eds.), vol. 31, Curran
Associates, Inc., 2018.
[3] M. A. Islam, S. Jia, and N. D. B. Bruce, “How much position information do convolutional neural networks encode?,” 2020.
[4] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox, “U-Net: Convolutional Networks for Biomedical Image Segmentation,” arXiv, 2015.
[5] X. Wang, T. Kong, C. Shen, Y. Jiang, and L. Li,
“Solo: Segmenting objects by locations,” in Computer
Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings, Part XVIII
16, pp. 649–665, Springer, 2020.
[6] H. Zhao, J. Jia, and V. Koltun, “Exploring self-attention
for image recognition,” in 2020 IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
pp. 10073–10082, 2020.
[7] V. Sitzmann, J. Thies, F. Heide, M. Nießner, G. Wetzstein, and M. Zollhofer, “Deepvoxels: Learning persistent 3d feature embeddings,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pp. 2437–2446, 2019.
[8] R. El Jurdi, C. Petitjean, P. Honeine, and F. Abdallah,
“Coordconv-unet: Investigating coordconv for organ segmentation,” IRBM, vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 415–423, 2021.
[9] Y. Dai, T. Jin, Y. Song, S. Sun, and C. Wu, “Convolutional neural network with spatial-variant convolution
kernel,” Remote Sensing, vol. 12, no. 17, 2020.

[10] A. Uselis, M. Lukoševičius, and L. Stasytis, “Localized
convolutional neural networks for geospatial wind forecasting,” Energies, vol. 13, no. 13, p. 3440, 2020.
[11] H. Su, V. Jampani, D. Sun, O. Gallo, E. Learned-Miller,
and J. Kautz, “Pixel-adaptive convolutional neural networks,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 11166–
11175, 2019.
[12] J. Bruna, W. Zaremba, A. Szlam, and Y. Lecun, “Spectral networks and locally connected networks on graphs,”
in International Conference on Learning Representations
(ICLR2014), CBLS, April 2014, 2014.
[13] M.-H. Guo, T.-X. Xu, J.-J. Liu, Z.-N. Liu, P.-T. Jiang,
T.-J. Mu, S.-H. Zhang, R. R. Martin, M.-M. Cheng, and
S.-M. Hu, “Attention mechanisms in computer vision:
A survey,” Computational Visual Media, vol. 8, no. 3,
pp. 331–368, 2022.
[14] Y. Zhang, K. Li, K. Li, L. Wang, B. Zhong, and Y. Fu,
“Image super-resolution using very deep residual channel
attention networks,” in Computer Vision – ECCV 2018
(V. Ferrari, M. Hebert, C. Sminchisescu, and Y. Weiss,
eds.), (Cham), pp. 294–310, Springer International Publishing, 2018.
[15] O. Oktay, J. Schlemper, L. L. Folgoc, M. Lee, M. Heinrich, K. Misawa, K. Mori, S. McDonagh, N. Y. Hammerla, B. Kainz, B. Glocker, and D. Rueckert, “Attention u-net: Learning where to look for the pancreas,” in
Medical Imaging with Deep Learning, 2018.
[16] X. Wang, R. Girshick, A. Gupta, and K. He, “Non-local
neural networks,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference
on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 7794–
7803, 2018.
[17] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A Method for
Stochastic Optimization,” 3rd International Conference
on Learning Representations, ICLR 2015 - Conference
Track Proceedings, 12 2014.
[18] K. Yanny, K. Monakhova, R. W. Shuai, and L. Waller,
“Deep learning for fast spatially varying deconvolution,”
Optica, vol. 9, pp. 96–99, Jan 2022.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

8
[19] B. Toader, J. Boulanger, Y. Korolev, M. O. Lenz, J. Manton, C.-B. Schönlieb, and L. Mureşan, “Image reconstruction in Light-Sheet microscopy: Spatially varying
deconvolution and mixed noise,” J Math Imaging Vis,
vol. 64, pp. 968–992, June 2022.
[20] T. Lauer, “Deconvolution with a spatially-variant psf,”
Proc SPIE, vol. 4847, 08 2002.
[21] Farrens, S., Ngolè Mboula, F. M., and Starck, J.-L.,
“Space variant deconvolution of galaxy survey images,”
A&A, vol. 601, p. A66, 2017.
[22] S. Howard, J. Esslinger, R. H. W. Wang, P. Norreys, and
A. Döpp, “Hyperspectral compressive wavefront sensing,” High Power Laser Science and Engineering, vol. 11,
p. e32, 2023.
[23] A. F. Agarap, “Deep learning using rectified linear units
(relu),” arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.08375, 2018.

[24] K. Yanny, N. Antipa, W. Liberti, S. Dehaeck, K. Monakhova, F. L. Liu, K. Shen, R. Ng, and L. Waller, “Miniscope3d: optimized single-shot miniature 3d fluorescence
microscopy,” Light, Science & Applications, vol. 9, 2020.
[25] V. Ljosa, K. Sokolnicki, and A. Carpenter, “Annotated
high-throughput microscopy image sets for validation,”
Nature methods, vol. 9, p. 637, 06 2012.
[26] Y. Zhang, Y. Zhu, E. Nichols, Q. Wang, S. Zhang,
C. Smith, and S. Howard, “A poisson-gaussian denoising dataset with real fluorescence microscopy images,” in
2019 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR), (Los Alamitos, CA, USA),
pp. 11702–11710, IEEE Computer Society, jun 2019.

9
VI.

APPENDIX

This section provides some additional results and metrics.

Training Curves

Training curves for the results displayed in Fig. 4b.
Each model was trained with the Adam optimizer with
default initial parameters, and the learning rate was set
to half if the validation loss did not decrease for 10
epochs.

FIG. 7: The SSIM of each trained models predictions,
evaluated on the test dataset.
EQUIVALENCY TO LOCALLY CONNECTED
LAYER

In the situation that the kernels within the convolutional layer form a complete basis, the CoordGate module is equally expressive as a locally-connected layer. To
see this, let’s take a simple example case of a 3 × 3 convolution, where a complete basis is for instance formed
by 9 “pixel-basis” filters of the form:



 

0 0 0
0 1 0
1 0 0
0 0 0 , 0 0 0 , · · · , 0 0 0
(6)
0 0 1
0 0 0
0 0 0

FIG. 6: Curves showing the PSNR evaluated on the
validation dataset during training, for each model.

CoordGate encodes position into a gating map, to amplify or dampen the individual filters at each position
of the convolutional feature map. For instance, at two
adjacent spatial positions, the gating map tensor could
have the values [1,2,1,1,1,1,1,1,1] and [0,2,1,1,1,1,1,1,1].
After the Hadamard product is taken between the gating map and the feature map, summing over the channel
dimension will result in combined filters:

 

1 2 1
0 2 1
1 1 1 , 1 1 1 .
1 1 1
1 1 1

SSIM Results

The structural similarity index measure (SSIM) for
each trained model, evaluated on the test set. We see
that these results follow the trend of the PSNR.

(7)

So we have broken the weight sharing inherent to convolutional layers and instead have individual filters for
the receptive field of each neuron. This is exactly what a
locally-connected neural network does. If we were to add
an additional gating map this operation would be identical to a locally-connected layer; without it all neurons
have a shared bias term.

