1

SFFNet: A Wavelet-Based Spatial and Frequency
Domain Fusion Network for Remote Sensing
Segmentation

arXiv:2405.01992v1 [cs.CV] 3 May 2024

Yunsong Yang, Genji Yuan, and Jinjiang Li

Abstract—In order to fully utilize spatial information for
segmentation and address the challenge of handling areas with
significant grayscale variations in remote sensing segmentation,
we propose the SFFNet (Spatial and Frequency Domain Fusion
Network) framework. This framework employs a two-stage network design: the first stage extracts features using spatial methods to obtain features with sufficient spatial details and semantic
information; the second stage maps these features in both spatial
and frequency domains. In the frequency domain mapping, we
introduce the Wavelet Transform Feature Decomposer (WTFD)
structure, which decomposes features into low-frequency and
high-frequency components using the Haar wavelet transform
and integrates them with spatial features. To bridge the semantic
gap between frequency and spatial features, and facilitate significant feature selection to promote the combination of features
from different representation domains, we design the Multiscale
Dual-Representation Alignment Filter (MDAF). This structure
utilizes multiscale convolutions and dual-cross attentions. Comprehensive experimental results demonstrate that, compared to
existing methods, SFFNet achieves superior performance in terms
of mIoU, reaching 84.80% and 87.73% respectively.The code is
located at https://github.com/yysdck/SFFNet.
Index Terms—Semantic segmentation, Remote sensing, Attention Mechanism,Global Modeling, Wavelet Transform,Frequency
Domain Features

I. I NTRODUCTION

W

Ith the continuous development of sensors and
aerospace technology, high-resolution satellite and
aerospace remote sensing images can be easily obtained, providing high-resolution observations of diverse landscapes on
Earth, covering various scenes from urban areas to farmlands,
forests, and lakes. Remote sensing image segmentation is a
crucial technology aimed at dividing remote sensing images of
Earth into different objects or categories, which is essential for
geographic information systems (GIS), resource management,
environmental monitoring, and crisis management. Here are
some key applications utilizing remote sensing image segmentation,such as land cover mapping [1, 2], change detection
[3, 4], environmental protection [5, 6], road and building
extraction [7, 8], and many other practical applications [9, 10].
In the field of remote sensing segmentation, various deep
learning-based methods have been proposed, covering multiple data types, including hyperspectral images (HSI), optical
images, LiDAR data, and integrated multisensor data [11, 12].
Convolutional neural network (CNN) methods have been
Y. Yang, G. Yuan and J. Li are with School of Computer Science and
Technology, Shandong Technology and Business University, Yantai 264005,
China

Fig. 1. The figure illustrates the challenges in remote sensing image segmentation: areas with large grayscale variations (such as shadows, edges, and
regions with significant texture changes) are difficult to accurately segment,
and the sole use of frequency domain features leads to spatial information
loss. The first column shows the original images, the second column shows
locally enlarged images, the third column shows the locally enlarged ground
truth labels (GT), the fourth column displays segmentation results of some
mainstream methods, and the fifth column presents the segmentation results
of SFFNet. Specifically: (a) showcases the segmentation results of ST-Unet
and SFFNet in shadow areas. (b) shows the segmentation results of ST-Unet
and SFFNet in edge areas. (c) demonstrates the segmentation results of STUnet and SFFNet (our method) in regions with significant texture changes. (d)
displays a scenario where XNet segments a car into two halves due to spatial
information loss, while SFFNet offers improvement. From (a) to (c), it can be
observed that segmentation methods not utilizing frequency domain features
perform poorly in handling areas with large grayscale variations, while (d)
illustrates the issue of spatial information loss caused by solely frequency
domain-based methods.

proven effective in classifying and segmenting each pixel in
a given image into semantic labels [13]. There are still many
scholars researching CNN-based segmentation networks, such
as AFF-Unet [14], CATNet [15].
Although CNNs perform well in overall segmentation accuracy, they have limitations in handling complex object
characteristics in remote sensing images, such as small scale,
high similarity, mutual occlusion, etc. [16]. Therefore, it is
crucial to globally model remote sensing segmentation networks. The current mainstream approach is to use attention
mechanisms to establish long-range dependencies, such as
Dual Attention [17], Criss-cross structure [18], and multiscale

2

attention [19]. However, these methods still rely on transforming global information into local aggregations of CNNs, rather
than directly encoding global context, making it difficult to
obtain clear global scene information from complex remote
sensing images. In contrast, the self-attention mechanism of
Transformers can avoid this problem. Subsequent scholars
introduced Vit [20] and Swintransformer [21] to adapt to
computer vision tasks, which also play an important role
in remote sensing image segmentation. Popular segmentation
network designs in remote sensing image segmentation often
combine Transformers and CNNs, such as ST-Unet [22] and
CSTUnet [23]
In the field of remote sensing image segmentation, these
CNN and Transformer fusion networks can effectively utilize
global and local information to some extent[24, 25]. However,
these methods are based solely on spatial segmentation and
do not utilize frequency domain information. In the complex
background of remote sensing images, grayscale variations
pose challenges to spatial segmentation. Particularly, regions
with significant grayscale variations such as edges and shadows lead to segmentation errors, while frequency domain
features are more sensitive to these areas[26, 27]. Therefore,
introducing frequency domain information into spatial segmentation networks is necessary.
Haar wavelet transform, as a fast decomposition method,
is often used for frequency domain transformation in image
processing [28]. It is commonly employed for tasks such as
decomposition [29], compression [30], denoising [31], among
others. A few studies have applied it to image segmentation
[32–34], where these methods directly substitute frequency
domain features from Haar wavelet transform for spatial
domain features, thus improving the model’s performance and
generalization to some extent. However, due to the particularity of remote sensing images, the sole use of frequency domain
features leads to unclear information and spatial information
loss. In contrast, spatial domain features are more capable
of capturing semantic information of different categories in
images and more accurate spatial information. Therefore, a
method is needed to effectively introduce frequency domain
information while maintaining spatial domain features to
address the challenges of spatial segmentation and improve
segmentation model accuracy.
Based on the above ideas, we designed a Spatial and
Frequency Domain Fusion Network (SFFNet), adopting a twostage approach to preserve rich semantic information and spatial information of spatial domain features while introducing
additional frequency domain features. Firstly, spatial domain
feature extraction is performed in the first stage, followed by
feature mapping utilizing spatial features from the first stage,
including global feature mapping and local feature mapping,
to retain sufficient spatial information. Simultaneously, to
introduce frequency domain features, we propose a Wavelet
Transform Feature Decomposer (WTFD) module, utilizing
Haar wavelet transform to decompose spatial features into
high-frequency and low-frequency signals, which are then
converted into high-frequency and low-frequency features embedded into CNN networks to complement mapped global and
local features. Subsequently, to achieve cross-scale alignment

and feature selection, we design a Wavelet Transform Feature
Decomposer (MDAF) module, which utilizes multiscale vertical bar convolution and dual-cross attention to implement
Dual-Representation Alignment Filter (DAF) for semantic
alignment and feature selection. Through these methods, we
expand local and global features with frequency domain information, enhancing feature representation capability, enabling
the model to more comprehensively consider areas with large
grayscale variations in images, such as shadows, edges, and
regions with significant texture changes, thereby improving
segmentation accuracy and robustness. Additionally, to enable
Swin Transformer to achieve more efficient global feature
mapping to adapt to remote sensing segmentation tasks, we
establish remote dependencies between Windows using a set
of vertical convolutions.
In summary, the contributions of this paper are as follows:
1. Proposal of Wavelet Transform Feature Decomposer(WTFD): We introduce a Haar wavelet transform decomposer as an additional frequency domain feature mapping
branch, utilizing it to decompose spatial features into highfrequency and low-frequency information to supplement local
and global information in the network, thereby preserving the
spatial characteristics and rich semantic features of spatial domain features and effectively introducing additional frequency
domain information.
2. Proposal of Multiscale Dual-Representation Alignment
Filter(MDAF): To achieve cross-scale semantic alignment and
feature selection between frequency domain information and
spatial domain information, we design an MDAF module,
which effectively bridges the semantic gap between frequency
domain features and spatial domain features and selects more
representative features for segmentation through multiscale
vertical convolution and dual-cross attention, implementing
Dual-Representation Alignment Filter (DAF).
3. Proposal of Spatial and Frequency Domain Fusion Network (SSFNet): Based on the above structures, we propose a
two-stage SSFNet network architecture that preserves spatial
information and rich semantic information of spatial domain
features. The first stage performs spatial feature extraction,
while the second stage ensures sufficient spatial information
through global feature mapping and local feature mapping,
while introducing additional frequency domain information
through WTFD. MDAF achieves semantic alignment and feature selection between frequency domain features and spatial
domain features, enabling the model to more comprehensively
consider features. Experimental results demonstrate that this
network architecture effectively addresses the challenges of
spatial segmentation and achieves excellent performance in
two mainstream remote sensing segmentation datasets.
II. R ELATED WORK
Remote sensing segmentation is a critical task in handling remote sensing images, aiming to partition images into
different regions based on land cover classes or features.
Researchers strive to enhance the accuracy and efficiency of
segmentation results by exploring various methods and technologies. Successful semantic segmentation in remote sensing

3

Fig. 2. The main framework of SFFNet illustrates a two-stage segmentation network. The first stage involves spatial feature extraction to acquire sufficient
spatial information. Subsequently, various feature mappings are performed in the second stage, including global feature mapping, local feature mapping,
and frequency domain feature mapping. Specifically, global feature mapping and local feature mapping preserve diverse spatial information, while frequency
domain feature mapping introduces additional frequency domain information. The frequency domain feature mapping is achieved through the WTFD method,
followed by alignment of spatial and frequency domain features using MDAF, bridging their semantic gaps and facilitating the combination of both features.

has significant applications in urban planning, agriculture
monitoring, among others. This section will introduce some
important works related to remote sensing segmentation and
discuss their impact and contributions to this field.
A. CNN-based Remote Sensing Image Semantic Segmentation
Traditional approaches in remote sensing image segmentation emphasize the design of robust features compatible with
spectral information and local image textures [35, 36], such
as the method proposed by Huang et al [37]. Despite highresolution datasets providing clear geometric information and
fine textures[38], they also introduce more noise, increasing
the segmentation difficulty.
Deep learning techniques are widely applied in remote
sensing segmentation. Fully Convolutional Networks (FCNs)
[39] address semantic segmentation problems, but their performance is limited [40, 41]. UNet [42] focuses on refining
semantic segmentation tasks and has become a standard model.
Some improvement methods such as ResUnet-a [43] and
Refine-UNet [44] enhance segmentation accuracy.
Due to the specificity of remote sensing images, such as
complex backgrounds, small targets, and occlusions, traditional methods often struggle to improve segmentation accuracy due to their limited receptive fields. To address this
issue, researchers attempt to apply multiscale features. Spatial
pyramid pooling in Deeplab [45] is a multiscale feature
extraction method, and other networks like MSCANet [46]
and MSLANet [47] also utilize multiscale features.
In this paper, we first utilize CNN for spatial feature
extraction and then employ a multi-scale downsampling CNN
branch to perform local multiscale mapping of features in
order to obtain multiscale features and retain spatial diversity
of local feature scales.
B. Transformer-based Semantic Segmentation of Remote Sensing Images
To overcome the limitations of local patterns in CNNs,
attention mechanisms play a crucial role in remote sensing

image segmentation. Li et al.[43] proposed a linear attention
mechanism, while Ding et al. [48] designed local attention
blocks, and MSCSA-Net [19] utilized local channel spatial
attention and multiscale attention. Although these attention
mechanisms improve performance, they still overly rely on
convolutional operations without directly encoding global context.
With the introduction of Vit [20], the above issue is avoided,
and numerous studies have emerged, such as SwinTransformer
[21], providing new ideas for directly encoding global context. Currently, remote sensing image segmentation methods
generally adopt Transformer-based approaches, including pure
Transformer architectures such as Segmenter [49] and SwinUNet [50], as well as models that combine Transformer and
CNN, such as GLOTS [51] and EMRT [52].
However, directly using SwinTransformer or Vit for global
feature mapping involves high computational complexity. In
remote sensing tasks, a lower computational approach for
global feature mapping should be adopted. In this paper, we
integrate SwinTransformer as an independent branch into the
CNN network to retain global spatial information. Moreover,
to better adapt to remote sensing tasks, we replace SW-MSA
with vertical convolutions for window interactions, achieving
a more efficient global feature mapping.
C. Wavelet Transform in Image Processing
Wavelet transforms play a significant role in signal and
image analysis, providing a multi-resolution representation
while capturing the low-frequency and high-frequency components of signals or images, aiding in better understanding
their structure and features. In image processing, methods
combining CNNs and wavelet transforms have been widely
used in tasks such as image restoration, super-resolution, and
compression. For example, in [53], a multi-level wavelet CNN
(MWCNN) model was proposed for image restoration. In
[54], a wavelet-based CNN (Wavelet-SRNet) was introduced
for multiscale face super-resolution. In [55], a wavelet-like

4

Fig. 3. This Figure illustrates three feature mapping methods in the feature mapping stage. (a) represents the global branch, which is used to map the original
features into global features. This module replaces the Shift window in Swintransformer with vertical bar-shaped convolutions, enabling the improved module
to have efficient global modeling capabilities and better adaptability to remote sensing tasks. (b) represents WTFD (Wavelet Transform Feature Decomposer),
which provides frequency domain information to the network. This structure decomposes the original features into low-frequency and high-frequency features
using the Haar wavelet transform, and subsequently combines them with spatial features to enable the model to consider features in a new representation
domain. (c) represents the local branch, which utilizes pooling pyramids to map the original features into spatially local multi-scale features.

transform integrated into CNNs for image compression. These
studies fully leverage the advantages of CNN feature learning
and the multi-resolution analysis provided by wavelet technology.
In the segmentation field, methods combining CNNs and
wavelet transforms have also been studied [32–34]. These
methods typically directly utilize purely frequency domain
features for segmentation. However, in remote sensing image
segmentation, due to the specificity of remote sensing images,
solely using frequency domain features often leads to the loss
of crucial spatial information. To balance the advantages of
spatial information and frequency domain features, we propose
SFFNet, which adopts a two-stage approach for segmentation.
We first perform spatial feature extraction, and then in the
second stage, we introduce WTFD to introduce additional
frequency domain features, decompose spatial features into
high-frequency and low-frequency information, and embed
them into the CNN network. Simultaneously, we map the
original features to global and local features to retain rich
spatial information. Subsequently, we use MDAF to bridge the
semantic gap between frequency domain features and spatial
features, achieve feature selection, and fuse the features of
the two representation domains. Such a design aims to retain
sufficient spatial information while addressing the challenge of
handling areas with large grayscale variations in spatial image
segmentation.
III. M ETHOD
In this section, we will first outline the overall structure
of SFFNet. Next, we will discuss several key components of

SFFNet in detail, namely the Global branch, Local branch,
and WTFD used for frequency domain feature mapping in
the feature mapping stage, as well as the MDAF used for
alignment and selection of frequency domain features and
spatial domain features. Finally, we will introduce the loss
function adopted in our approach.
A. SFFNet Structure
The structure of SFFNet is depicted in Fig.2, designed
as a two-stage segmentation network. The first stage utilizes
ConvNext [56] for sufficient spatial feature extraction, adjusting features from the last three downsampling stages to the
same scale and merging them. The second stage is the feature
mapping stage, transforming raw data with redundant information into a more representative and discriminative feature
space through feature mapping. There are three branches for
feature mapping: the Global branch utilizes an improved Swin
Transformer for global feature mapping, the Local branch is
used for multi-scale local feature mapping, and the Wavelet
Transformer branch utilizes Haar wavelet transform to map
original features into frequency-domain high-frequency and
low-frequency features. Subsequently, MDAF is used to align,
select, and combine local features and high-frequency features,
as well as global features and low-frequency features, to obtain
more powerful mixed features. Finally, the expanded global
features, local features, and mixed features from the feature
extraction stage are merged, and the final segmentation results
are obtained through the segmentation header.
Specifically, for an input image x ∈ R3×h×w , where h and
w are the height and width of the input image, respectively,

5

the first stage of feature extraction yields four features of
different scales: x1 ∈ RC×H×W , x2 ∈ R2C×(H/2)×(W/2) ,
x3 ∈ R4C×(H/4)×(W/4) , x4 ∈ R8C×(H/8)×(W/8) , where H
and W are the downsampled height and width, and C = 96.
Then, through convolution and interpolation, the latter three
features are merged, expressed as follows:
X ′ = Cat(δ1×1 (φ(x2 )), δ1×1 (φ(x3 )), δ1×1 (φ(x4 )))

(1)

where φ(·) represents the interpolation operation, δk×k (·)
denotes the convolution with a kernel size of k × k, Cat indicates the concatenation operation, and X ′ ∈ R3C×(H/2)×(W/2)
represents the fused features of x2 , x3 , and x4 . This fusion
operation effectively combines deep semantic information and
surface spatial information, providing more powerful spatial
features for subsequent operations.
Subsequently, X ′ is used as the raw data for the second
stage feature mapping. Through the three feature mapping
branches in HWT, frequency-domain high-frequency and lowfrequency features, as well as spatial global and local features,
are obtained:

 Fg = fg (X ′ )
Fm = fm (X ′ )
(2)

Fl , Fh = fw (X ′ )
where fg (·), fm (·), and fw (·) denote the operations of the
Global branch, Local branch, and WTFD for feature mapping,
respectively. Fg , Fm , Fl , and Fh represent the mapped global
features, multi-scale local features, low-frequency features,
and high-frequency features, respectively, with dimensions
C × (H/4) × (W/4).
Next, the spatial features and frequency-domain features are
split into two groups and fed into MDAF, which aligns the
semantic gaps between frequency-domain features and spatial
features for feature selection. Finally, these two features, along
with the first-layer output of the feature extraction stage, are
combined, and the final segmentation results are obtained
through the segmentation header:
 ′
Fg = fmdaf (Fg , Fl )
(3)
′
Fm = fmdaf (Fm , Fh )
′

′

′

Y = δ(Cat(φ(Fg ), φ(Fm ), x1 , δ(X )))

(4)

where fmdaf (S, F ) denotes the MDAF block for aligning
′
spatial features S and frequency-domain features F , Fg and
′
Fm represent the global features and multi-scale local features
with frequency-domain information, both with dimensions
of (C, H/4, W/4), and Y represents the final mixed features, with dimensions of (C, H/2, W/2), which are obtained
through the final segmentation header.
SFFNet adopts a concise design, avoiding a complex decoder. By using a two-stage method, it retains spatial information while expanding the representation space, thereby
improving the accuracy and robustness of the segmentation
network. Next, we will introduce the important components
of SFFNet, namely the Global branch, Local branch, WTFD,
and MDAF used for achieving multiscale semantic alignment

Fig. 4. Establishing remote dependencies between windows using vertical
stripwise convolutions. Remote dependencies between windows are established by employing a set of vertical stripwise convolutions on pre-segmented
windows. For instance, as illustrated in the figure, feature connections from
x1 to both x2 and x3 are achieved through convolutions of length equal to
the window size. Additionally, dependencies between x2 and x3 to x4 are
established, with each pixel possessing information from other pixels within
its respective window, thereby facilitating interaction between windows.

and feature selection between frequency-domain and spatial
features during the feature mapping stage.

B. Feature Mapping
1) Global Branch: To make Swintransformer more efficient
for global mapping and better adapt to remote sensing segmentation tasks, we have enhanced it by designing a Global
branch, as illustrated in Fig.3(a). In this branch, we first downsample the features and then, similar to Swintransformer, use
the W-Trans block for window partitioning and establishing
global features within each window, as described in [21].
However, for inter-window information interaction, we have
abandoned the complex SW-Trans block in Swintransformer
and instead opted for a more efficient vertical stripe convolution. The vertical stripe convolution is designed as a set of
convolutions with kernel sizes of (1 × x) and (x × 1). Fig.4
illustrates the principle of using vertical stripe convolution to
establish interaction between windows. For instance, considering a feature pixel x1 in window 1 that has been partitioned
using the previous W-Trans block, by applying vertical stripe
convolution with kernel sizes of (1 × ws) and (ws × 1),
where ws represents window size, we can establish remote
dependencies between x1 and feature pixels x2 and x3 . Since
x2 and x3 have already established remote dependencies with
x4 in window 4 using the same method, x1 thus establishes
remote dependencies with all other window pixels in this
manner.
Specifically, for an input feature x ∈ RC×H×W , we first
downsample it using a 3×3 convolution and then process it
through the W-Trans block:
Fp = Fwtrans (δ3×3 (x))

(5)

where Fwtrans (·) denotes the operation of using the WTrans block on the features, detailed derivation can be seen in
[21], and Fp ∈ RC×(H/2)×(W/2) represents the features obtained through window partitioning and window self-attention
operations.

6

The entire global branch can be described as follows:
Fg = fg (x)
= ψ(Cat(δ3×3 (x), δws×ws + δ1×ws (Fp ) + δws×1 (Fp )))
(6)
where ws denotes the window size and ψ(·) denotes batch
normalization. Fg ∈ R(C/3)×(H/2)×(W/2) represents the computation result of the global branch.
By using a set of vertical stripe convolutions instead of the
SW-Trans block, we have achieved efficient global mapping.
Moreover, objects in remote sensing images often exhibit
directional features, such as roads, rivers, and edges. Using
vertical stripe convolutions in the Global branch not only
allows us to learn features in both horizontal and vertical
directions but also enables better capture of these directional
features, thus better adapting to remote sensing images.
2) Local Branch: To achieve local multi-scale feature mapping of the original data, we designed the Local branch, whose
structure can be referenced in Fig.3(c). In the Local branch,
to obtain sufficient multi-scale features during the feature
mapping stage, we adopt the classic multi-scale max-pooling
(5×5, 9×9, 13×13) on downsampled features. Employing
multi-scale max-pooling on downsampled features effectively
captures feature information at different scales, thereby enhancing the model’s ability to recognize multi-scale features.
Before describing the entire Local branch, we define several
operations in advance:
fBL (x) = δ3×3 (δ1×1 (x))

(7)

fSP P (x) = Cat(M P 5×5 (x), M P 9×9 (x), M P 13×13 (x), x)
(8)
Here, fBL (·) represents the Bottleneck layer, fSP P (·))
denotes the Spatial Pyramid pooling operation, and M P k×k (·)
represents max-pooling with a kernel size of k × k, where the
outputs and inputs of these two operations are of the same size.
For the input features x of the Local branch, x ∈ RC×H×W ,
we have:
Fm = fm (x)
= ψ(Cat(δ3×3 (δ3×3 (x)),

(9)

fBL (fSP P (fBL (ψ(δ3×3 (x)))))))
Here, Fm ∈ R2C×(H/2)×(W/2) represents the output features of the Local branch.
3) Wavelet Transform Feature Decomposer : Images
are two-dimensional (or three-dimensional) discrete nonstationary signals that contain information in different frequency ranges. The Haar wavelet transform can perform multiresolution decomposition of image signals, capturing their
local properties and specific adaptability, thus it is widely
used to improve the feature representation of image signals,
such as denoising, super-resolution, and compression tasks.
However, in the field of image segmentation, the application
of wavelet transforms is relatively limited. Previous studies
usually directly apply wavelet transforms to the downsampling

Fig. 5. Principle diagram of feature decomposition using Haar Wavelet
Transform. Where A(x) represents low-pass filtering of the original data
to obtain the low-frequency approximation coefficients, and D(x) represents
high-pass filtering of the original data to obtain the high-frequency detail
coefficients. Each decomposition reduces the size of the features by half. The
proposed WTFD in this paper obtains the low-frequency signal A, horizontal
high-frequency signal H, vertical high-frequency signal V, and diagonal highfrequency signal D through two iterations of Haar Wavelet Transform.

layers of CNN networks, substituting frequency domain features for spatial domain features, but this may lead to spatial
information loss. To overcome this issue, we propose a method
that simultaneously considers frequency domain and spatial
domain information.
To introduce frequency domain information into the segmentation network, we design a Wavelet Transform Feature
Decomposer (WTFD) module for frequency domain feature
mapping. Its structure can be seen in Fig.3(b).This module
utilizes convolution and the Haar wavelet transform to convert
spatial domain features into four frequency domain components, one of which is the low-frequency component and the
other three are the horizontal, vertical, and diagonal highfrequency components. Then, feature representation learning is
performed on the low-frequency information through convolution to obtain low-frequency features. The process of the Haar
wavelet transform is illustrated in Fig.5, where A(·) represents
the low-pass filter, D(·) represents the high-pass filter, and A,
H, V , D respectively represent the low-frequency component,
horizontal high-frequency component, vertical high-frequency
component, and diagonal high-frequency component. The
three high-frequency components are combined into a highfrequency signal through concatenation, followed by nonlinear operations for feature mapping. In this process, we
reduce the channel dimension to filter out redundant information as much as possible, thus obtaining high-frequency
features. This method fully utilizes the simple and efficient
decomposition of the Haar wavelet transform on image signals,
introducing frequency information into the network to achieve
a more comprehensive feature representation.
Specifically, for the input x ∈ RC×H×W , a point convolution operation is first performed to increase the non-linearity
of the features, resulting in new features X ∈ RC×H×W
with unchanged dimensions. Then, the Haar wavelet transform
is used to transform the features into one low-frequency
component, one horizontal high-frequency component, one

7

Fig. 6. MDAF Structure. (a) Multiscale Mapping. (b) MDAF. This structure is used for semantic alignment and feature selection between frequency domain
features and spatial domain features. We first perform multiscale mapping on both types of features to align them to a unified scale. Then, utilizing a DualRepresentation Alignment Filter (DAF) implemented with cross-attention, we facilitate interaction and selection between the two types of features. Finally,
the selected features are combined to obtain more representative feature signals for subsequent segmentation.

vertical high-frequency component, and one diagonal highfrequency component. For each channel Xc ∈ RH×W , the
1st-order Haar wavelet transform is calculated as follows:

c (i,2j)
 Ac (i, j) = Xc (i,2j−1)+X
2
(10)

Dc (i, j) = Xc (2i − 1, j) − Xc (2i, j)
Where Ac(i,j) represents the low-frequency approximation
coefficients of channel c, and Dc(i,j) represents the highfrequency detail coefficients of channel c, where i is the row
index and j is the column index. i ranges from 1 to H and
j ranges from 1 to W
2 . Then, the Haar wavelet transform is
applied to each column of the approximation coefficients and
detail coefficients as follows:

c (i,2j)
Ac = AAc (i, j) = Ac (i,2j−1)+A

2







c (i,2j)
 Hc = ADc (i, j) = Dc (i,2j−1)−D
2
(11)


 Vc = DAc (i, j) = Ac (i, 2j − 1) − Ac (i, 2j − 1)






Dc = DDc (i, j) = Dc (i, 2j − 1) − Dc (i, 2j)
Where Ac represents the approximation coefficients of a single channel, Hc represents the horizontal detail coefficients of
a single channel, Vc represents the vertical detail coefficients of
a single channel, Dc represents the diagonal detail coefficients
of a single channel, and i ranges from 1 to H2 and j ranges
from 1 to W
2 . Finally, the concatenation of the three highfrequency components followed by point convolution for lowdimensional mapping is performed to obtain the final highfrequency and low-frequency features:
Fl , Fh = fw (x) = (ψ(δ1×1 (A)), ψ(δ1×1 (Cat(H, V, D))))
(12)
Where Fl and Fh represent high-frequency and
low-frequency features, respectively, with dimensions
(C, H/2, W/2), ψ(·) denotes batch normalization calculation,
and δk×k represents a convolution kernel size of k × k.

WTFD decomposes spatial domain features into highfrequency features with local details and low-frequency features with global characteristics, providing a more comprehensive feature set for the segmentation network to consider the
frequency domain information of features.
C. Multiscale Dual-Representation Alignment Filter
Frequency domain features and spatial domain features
capture different aspects and properties of an image, but due
to their semantic differences, semantic alignment is required
to ensure consistency and complementarity in representing the
image. To achieve this semantic alignment and feature selection for both frequency domain and spatial domain features
and promote their combination, we designed a Multi-Domain
Attention Fusion (MDAF), as shown in Fig.6.
Firstly, we use scale mapping to map frequency domain
features and spatial domain features to a unified scale. Specifically, we employ vertical bar-shaped convolutions of different
scales to process each feature, then concatenate them and use
1×1 convolutions to map them into matrices Q, K, and V of
unified scale as the input for the next stage.
Spatial domain features and frequency domain features each
obtain two sets of matrices (Q1, K1, V1) and (Q2, K2, V2),
then we propose a method called Domain Attention Fusion
(DAF), which calculates attention by querying the counterpart
and its own key-value pairs, followed by feature weighting,
ultimately achieving feature selection. Finally, concatenate the
two as the final output feature.
Through DAF, the model can dynamically adjust attention
weights based on task requirements and feature attributes,
allowing features with similar semantics to receive greater
attention and weight, while features with different semantics
can be suppressed or ignored. This ensures that the model
focuses more on features with similar semantics during feature
selection, thereby achieving better semantic alignment.
For the specific derivation, for input X ∈ RC×H×W × , we
define the Multi-scale Ortho-Convolution operation as:

8

IV. E XPERIMENT
Q, K, V = fmm (x)
= δ1×1 (OC 7 (LN (x))

A. Experimental settings
(13)

+ OC 11 (LN (x)) + OC 21 (LN (x)))
where, OC k represents bar-shaped convolution with kernel
size 1 × k and k × 1, LN (·) represents layer normalization,
fmm (·) represents multi-scale mapping operation, and Q, K,
V are matrices after using Multi-scale Ortho-Convolution
operation, all of which have sizes (C, H, W ).
For the entire feature alignment operation, the input spatial
domain feature Fs ∈ RC×H×W and frequency domain feature Ff ∈ RC×H×W undergo Multi-scale Ortho-Convolution
operations respectively:

Q1, K1, V 1 = fmm (Fs )
(14)
Q1, K1, V 1 = fmm (Fs )
The attention formula is:
QK T
Attn(Q, K, V ) = Sof tmax( √ )V
d

(15)

where d = C × H × W . Then the steps for DAF calculation
are as follows:

F1 = δ1×1 (Attn(Q2, K1, V 1))
(16)
F2 = δ1×1 (Attn(Q1, K2, V 2))
Then MDAF operation can be defined as:
Fout = fmdaf (Fs , Ff ) = Cat(F1 , F2 )

(17)

where, F1 , F2 are the two outputs of DAF, and F1 , F2 ∈
RC/2×H×W , fmdaf (Fs , Ff ) represents the use of MDAF
operation on spatial domain feature Fs and frequency domain
feature Ff , and Fout ∈ RC×H×W is the output tensor of
fmdaf .
D. Loss function
The loss function L used in this paper is a combination of
a dice loss Ldice and a cross-entropy loss function Lce , which
can be expressed as:
N

Lce = −

K

1 X X (n)
(n)
yk log ŷk
N n=1

(18)

k=1

N

K

(n) (n)

2 X X ŷk yk
Ldice = 1 −
(n)
(n)
N n=1
ŷ + y

(19)

L = Lce + Ldice

(20)

k=1

k

k

Here, N represents the number of samples, and K represents the number of classes. y (n) and ŷ (n) denote the one-hot
encoding of the true semantic labels and their corresponding
softmax outputs from the network, where n ∈ [1, . . . , N ].
(n)
Specifically, ŷk represents the confidence of sample n belonging to class k.

1) Datasets: The Vaihingen and Potsdam datasets are
widely recognized as standard data sources in the field of
remote sensing image semantic segmentation. They are commonly used for algorithm performance evaluation to ensure
the broad applicability and comparability of research results.
These datasets provide diverse land cover categories and
environmental conditions, including buildings, roads, trees,
etc. They also consider different seasons, weather, and lighting
conditions, which help evaluate the robustness and generalization performance of models. Due to the extensive research and
use of these datasets, we can easily compare and contrast our
work with previous studies. Here is a detailed introduction to
these two datasets:
Vaihingen Dataset: This dataset originates from remote
sensing images of the Vaihingen area in Germany, comprising
33 high-resolution TOP image blocks, each with an average
size of 2494×2064 pixels. The image blocks consist of true
orthophoto (TOP), digital surface model (DSM), and normalized digital surface model (NDSM). The dataset covers five
foreground land cover classes (impervious surfaces, buildings,
low vegetation, trees, cars) and one background land cover
class (clutter). In experiments, we strictly selected training
data according to specific training IDs provided by the ISPRS
competition (IDs 1, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, 15, 17, 21, 23, 26,
28, 30, 32, 34, 37), and the remaining 17 images were
used for testing. This selection ensures consistency with data
from other researchers for comparative analysis. We cropped
image blocks into small patches of size 1024×1024 pixels for
processing.
Potsdam Dataset: This dataset utilizes aerial images from
Potsdam, Germany, containing 38 high-resolution TOP image
blocks, with a ground sampling distance of 5 centimeters and a
size of 6000×6000 pixels per block. Similar to Vaihingen, each
image block consists of true TOP and digital surface model
(DSM) and provides four multispectral bands (red, green,
blue, and near-infrared). During training, we also used specific
training IDs provided by the ISPRS competition, including
image numbers 2 10, 2 11, 2 12, 3 10, 3 11, 3 12, 4 10,
4 11, 4 12, 5 10, 5 11, 5 12, 6 7, 6 8, 6 9, 6 10, 6 11,
6 12, 7 7, 7 8, 7 9, 7 11, and 7 12, while the remaining
15 images were used as the test set. Similarly, we cropped
image blocks into 1024× 1024 pixel patches for analysis. In
quantitative evaluation, we excluded the ”clutter/background”
category.
2) Implementation Details: In this study, we utilized the
Ubuntu 18.04 operating system and deployed all models on a
single NVIDIA GeForce RTX 2080 Ti 11GB GPU, using the
PyTorch 1.11 framework. To accelerate the convergence speed
of the models, we employed the AdamW optimizer, with a
base learning rate set to 6e-4, and utilized cosine learning
rate scheduling. For the Vaihingen and Potsdam datasets,
we conducted the following data preprocessing steps: Firstly,
we randomly cropped images into patches of size 512×512.
During the training phase, we introduced multiple data augmentation techniques, including random scaling (0.5, 0.75,

9

TABLE I
R ESULTS OF SFFN ET WITH INDIVIDUAL COMPONENTS REMOVED .

Method

Vaihingen

Potsdam

mIoU(%)

F1(%)

mIoU(%)

F1(%)

SFFNet

84.80

91.67

87.73

93.36

SFFNet w/o Global

83.73

91.04

86.50

92.65

SFFNet w/o Local

83.75

91.05

86.68

92.76

SFFNet w/o WTFD-L

83.99

91.19

86.55

92.68

SFFNet w/o WTFD-H

84.11

91.26

86.93

92.90

SFFNet w/o MDAF + Cat

84.21

91.31

87.17

93.04

SFFNet w/o MDAF + Add

84.02

91.21

87.01

92.93

Fig. 7. Data set label proportion chart

1.0, 1.25, 1.5), random vertical flipping, random horizontal
flipping, and random rotation. The training process consisted
of 105 epochs. During the testing phase, we employed multiscale evaluation and random flipping augmentation techniques
to ensure the robustness and performance of the models.
3) Evaluation metrics: In this experiment, we adopted
commonly used metrics in remote sensing segmentation: OA
(Overall Accuracy), F1 score, and mIoU (Mean Intersection
over Union) as evaluation metrics. Additionally, to assess the
model’s parameter count, we also used the Parameters and
FLOPs metrics. Before introducing these metrics, we need to
understand some related terms and symbol meanings: tp (true
positives), fp (false positives), fn (false negatives), tn (true
negatives).
Precision:Precision measures the proportion of true positive
samples among the samples predicted as positive by the model.
In simple terms, precision tells us the likelihood that a sample
predicted as positive by the model is indeed a true positive.
tp
P recision =
tp + f p

(21)

Recall: Recall refers to the proportion of true positive
samples that the model successfully predicts as positive among
all truly positive samples. Recall measures the model’s ability
to identify all positives.
Recall =

tp
tp + f n

(22)

Overall Accuracy (OA):OA is one of the commonly used
performance evaluation metrics in image classification tasks.
It represents the proportion of correctly classified samples to
the total number of samples. However, OA may not handle
class imbalances well, as the model may tend to predict the
class with more samples when some classes have far more
samples than others.
OA =

tp + tn
tp + f p + f n + tn

(23)

F1 Score: The F1 score is the harmonic mean of precision
and recall. It comprehensively considers the model’s accuracy
and its ability to capture positives. For multi-class problems,

F1 scores are usually calculated for each class and then
averaged.
2 × (P recision × Recall)
(24)
P recision + Recall
Overall F1 Score = Average of F1 Scores for all classes.
Mean Intersection over Union (mIoU): mIoU is a commonly used evaluation metric in semantic segmentation tasks,
measuring the accuracy of the model in pixel-level segmentation. IoU (Intersection over Union) is used to measure the
segmentation results for each class, while mIoU computes the
average IoU for all classes.
tp
IoU =
(25)
tp + f p + f n
mIoU is the sum of IoU values for all categories divided by
the number of categories.
F1 =

B. Ablation Experiment
To assess the performance of different components of
SFFNet, we conducted a series of ablation experiments, validated using the Vaihingen and Potsdam datasets. In the discussion, we primarily focus on two performance metrics: mIoU
(mean Intersection over Union) and meanF1. All experimental
results are averages obtained from multiple trials.
1) Components of SFFNet: Tab.I presents the results of
SFFNet with individual modules removed. Here, ”Global”
denotes the global branch, ”Local” refers to the local branch,
”WTFD-L” represents the low-frequency part decomposed
by WTFD, ”WTFD-H” represents the high-frequency part
decomposed by WTFD, and ”MDAF” stands for Multiscale
Dual-Representation Alignment Filter (MDAF). To validate
the effectiveness of MDAF, we also conducted comparisons by
removing MDAF and directly concatenating (marked as ”Cat”)
or adding (marked as ”Add”) frequency domain features
and spatial domain features. For experiments where either
the low-frequency or high-frequency part is removed from
SFFNet, the corresponding feature alignment by MDAF is
also removed simultaneously. The components removed in the
ablation experiments are indicated by ”(w/o),” and the added
components are marked with ”(+).”
Fig.7 shows the segmentation results after removing individual modules from SFFNet. Observing the results, it

10

TABLE II
R ESULTS OF A DDING I NDIVIDUAL M ODULES ON BASELINE
M ODEL ON THE VAIHINGEN DATASET
Method

mIoU(%)

F1(%)

Baseline

81.70

89.78

Baseline + Global

82.61

90.36

Baseline + Local

82.73

90.41

Baseline + WTFD-H

82.29

90.15

Baseline + WTFD-L

82.88

90.51

TABLE III
C OMPARISON OF PARAMETER COUNT AND F LOPS OF DIFFERENT
GLOBAL FEATURE MAPPING MODULES , AS WELL AS M I O U AND F1
SCORES ON THE VAIHINGEN DATASET.
Method

Params(M)↓ Flops(G)↓ mIoU(%)↑ F1(%)↑

Vit-Block

3.68

3.82

84.38

91.13

Swin-T-Block

0.40

6.58

84.72

91.57

Mobile-Vit-Block

0.51

8.42

84.39

91.32

Fast-Vit-Block

0.22

3.55

84.59

91.41

Global(Ours)

0.48

1.99

84.80

91.67

Fig. 9. Local enlarged segmentation results before and after adding the Global
branch in the baseline. (a) corresponds to the baseline. (b) corresponds to
Baseline+GLB. It can be observed from the images that the model shows
improved performance in segmenting large continuous regions after adding
the Global branch.

The best results are indicated in bold black.In the table header,
an upward arrow indicates that a higher evaluation value is better,
and a downward arrow indicates that a higher evaluation value is
better.
TABLE IV
N UMBER OF PARAMETERS FOR DIFFERENT BACKBONES ON
THE VAIHINGEN DATASET ’ S M I O U
Method

SFFNet

Backbone

Parameters(M)↓

mIoU(%) ↑

ResNet50

25.55

84.41

ResNext50

25.01

84.48

ResNest50

27.46

84.54

ConvNext-Tiny

28.57

84.80

Fig. 8. This Figure shows the locally enlarged segmentation results of
removing various components in SFFNet. (a) represents SFFNet. (b) represents SFFNet without the global branch. (c) represents SFFNet without the
local branch. (d) represents SFFNet without WTFD-L. (e) represents SFFNet
without WTFD-H. It can be observed from the figure that removing any branch
results in a decline in segmentation performance.

Fig. 10. Local enlarged segmentation results before and after adding the
Local branch in the baseline. (a) corresponds to the baseline. (b) corresponds
to Baseline+Local. The images demonstrate that the model using the Local
branch achieves better segmentation results for local details.

Fig. 11. Local enlarged segmentation results before and after adding lowfrequency features in the baseline. (a) corresponds to the baseline. (b)
corresponds to Baseline+WTFD-L. It can be seen that using low-frequency
features has a noticeable effect on objects difficult to segment under shadows.

11

Fig. 12. Local enlarged segmentation results before and after adding highfrequency features in the baseline. (a) corresponds to the baseline. (b)
corresponds to Baseline+WTFD-H. Improvement in the edge parts is observed
after adding high-frequency features to the model.

Fig. 14. Segmentation results of IDs 10 and 12 on the Vaihingen dataset. The
first column shows the original image, the second column shows the ground
truth (GT), and the third column shows the segmentation results of SFFNet.

Fig. 13. The effects of four types of feature mappings on the extracted
features in the first stage. (a) shows the original features before mapping.
(b) shows the features after local mapping. (c) shows the features after global
mapping. (d) displays the decomposed high-frequency features, and (e) shows
the decomposed low-frequency features. It can be observed that local features
focus more on local details, such as small objects, while global features focus
on large-scale continuous regions. High-frequency features primarily focus on
local edges, and low-frequency features also emphasize large-scale continuous
regions, but they tend to pay more attention to shadowed areas and regions
with multiple textures compared to spatial global features. However, spatial
features lack attention to shadowed areas and regions with multiple textures.

is evident that the segmentation performance of SFFNet is
weakened when any module is removed. To further validate the
effectiveness of each component, we conducted experiments
on the Vaihingen dataset by incrementally adding individual
modules to the baseline model. We set the baseline model as
directly obtaining segmentation results through a segmentation
head after the spatial features of the first stage of SFFNet, with
ConvNext used as the encoder. Tab.II presents the experimental
results of adding individual modules to the baseline model.
Fig.8, Fig.9, Fig.10 and Fig.11 respectively demonstrate the
effects of adding any single component to the baseline model,
while Fig.12 illustrates the four different feature maps (local
features, global features, high-frequency features, and lowfrequency features) after mapping in the second stage. Overall,
the comprehensive results indicate that each component proposed in our study positively impacts the model performance.
2) Impact of Global branch: According to the data in Tab.I,
after removing the Global branch in the Vaihingen dataset,
the mIoU and F1 of SFFNet decreased by 1.07% and 0.63%,
respectively. Similarly, in the Potsdam dataset, removing the

Global branch led to a decrease in mIoU and F1 by 1.23%
and 0.71%, respectively. From Tab.II, it can be observed that
adding the Global branch to the baseline model resulted in a
performance improvement of 0.91% in mIoU and 0.58% in
F1.
Visualization results in Fig.9 show that adding the Global
branch to the baseline model improves the segmentation of
large continuous objects. Additionally, from Fig.13(c), it can
be observed that features using the Global branch have higher
discriminability in large continuous regions, further validating
the Global branch’s capability of global modeling.
To verify the improved efficiency of the enhanced Global
branch in global mapping, we compared it with other mainstream modules with global mapping capabilities, including
Vit[20], Swin-T[21], Mobile-Vit[57], and Fast-Vit[58]. Experimental results are shown in Tab.III, indicating that our Global
branch performs best in terms of FLOPs and segmentation
accuracy, further demonstrating the model’s ability to perform
global mapping more efficiently.
3) Impact of Local branch: According to the results in
Tab.I, removing the Local branch for SFFNet on the Vaihingen
dataset resulted in a decrease of 1.05% in mIoU and 0.62%
in F1. Similarly, on the Potsdam dataset, removing the Local
branch led to a decrease of 1.05% in mIoU and 0.6% in F1.
From Tab.II, it can be seen that adding the Local branch to the
baseline model increased mIoU by 1.03% and F1 by 0.63%.
Through visualization results in Fig.10, it is observed that
adding the Local branch to the baseline model improves the
segmentation of small local objects. Moreover, from Fig.13(b),
it can be seen that features using the Local branch can better
distinguish local details, further validating the Local branch’s
ability to model local information.

12

Fig. 15. Local enlargement of segmentation results on the Vaihingen dataset for SFFNet and other comparative models. (a) Corresponds to ABCNet. (b)
Corresponds to MAResU-Net. (c) Corresponds to A2-FPN. (d) Corresponds to ST-Unet. (e) Corresponds to DC-Swin. (f) Corresponds to MPCNet. (g)
Corresponds to Xnet. (h) Corresponds to SFFNet (Ours). From the figure, it can be observed that our model performs better in segmenting areas with large
grayscale variations compared to spatial segmentation methods, while also having more comprehensive spatial information compared to purely frequency
domain segmentation methods.

Fig. 16. mIoU variation of SFFNet and several mainstream segmentation
methods with Epoch. From the figure, it can be seen that SFFNet converges
faster and is more stable compared to other networks.

4) Impact of WTFD: Initially, the original features were decomposed into high-frequency and low-frequency features by
WTFD, which contain information lacking in spatial features.
According to the data in Tab.I, removing the low-frequency
features for SFFNet on the Vaihingen dataset resulted in a
decrease of 0.81% in mIoU and 0.48% in F1. Similarly, on
the Potsdam dataset, removing the low-frequency features led

Fig. 17. Segmentation results of IDs 3 13 and 3 14 on the Vaihingen dataset.
The first column shows the original image, the second column shows the
ground truth (GT), and the third column displays the segmentation results of
SFFNet.

13

Fig. 18. Local enlarged view of segmentation results of SFFNet and other comparative models on the Potsdam dataset. (a) corresponds to ABCNet. (b)
corresponds to MAResU-Net. (c) corresponds to A2-FPN. (d) corresponds to ST-Unet. (e) corresponds to DC-Swin. (f) corresponds to MPCNet. (g) corresponds
to Xnet. (h) corresponds to SFFNet (Ours). Similar to the results on the Vaihingen dataset, it can be observed from the figure that our model performs better in
segmenting areas with large grayscale variations compared to spatial domain segmentation methods, while compared to purely frequency domain segmentation
methods, SFFNet also preserves more comprehensive spatial information.

to a decrease of 1.18% in mIoU and 0.68% in F1. Conversely,
adding low-frequency features to the baseline model increased
mIoU by 1.18% and F1 by 0.73%. On the other hand,
according to Tab.I, removing the high-frequency features for
SFFNet on the Vaihingen dataset resulted in a decrease of
0.69% in mIoU and 0.41% in F1. Similarly, on the Potsdam
dataset, removing the high-frequency features led to a decrease
of 0.8% in mIoU and 0.46% in F1. Conversely, adding highfrequency features to the baseline model increased mIoU by
0.59% and F1 by 0.37%.
Through visualization results in Fig.11, it is observed that
adding low-frequency features to the baseline model improves
the segmentation of objects with large shaded areas. From
Fig.13(e), it can be seen that low-frequency features and
global features have good discriminability for continuous large
objects, and they also have high attention in large continuous shadow areas, which are lacking in spatial features.
On the other hand, through visualization results in Fig.12,
it is observed that adding high-frequency features to the
baseline model improves the segmentation of edge areas. From
Fig.13(d), it can be seen that high-frequency features focus
more on local edge information, which is lacking in spatial
local features. The introduction of frequency domain features
through WTFD significantly improves the segmentation results
of the model in areas with significant grayscale variations.

5) Impact of MDAF: From Tab.I, it can be observed
that replacing MDAF with Concat resulted in a decrease of
0.59% and 0.36% in mIoU and F1 scores, respectively, on
the Vaihingen dataset, and a decrease of 0.56% and 0.32%
on the Potsdam dataset. Conversely, replacing MDAF with
Addition led to a decrease of 0.78% and 0.46% in mIoU
and F1 scores, respectively, on the Vaihingen dataset, and
a decrease of 0.72% and 0.43% on the Potsdam dataset.
These reductions in performance are attributed to the semantic
differences between frequency domain and spatial domain
features, as direct Concat and Addition without achieving
semantic alignment fused the features from the two representation domains. In contrast, our MDAF first aligns the features
from the two representation domains before fusion, leading to
better performance as evidenced by the experimental results.
6) Impact of Backbone: In order to eliminate the influence
of backbone on the results, we conducted a series of replacement experiments on the Vaihingen dataset, using several commonly used and widely adopted backbone models, including
ConvNext-Tiny, ResNet50, ResNext50, and ResNest50. The
experimental results are shown in Tab.IV. Observing the data
in the table, it can be seen that although the ConvNext-Tiny
model has a larger number of parameters, the SFFNet model
performs best when using ConvNext-Tiny as the backbone.
Therefore, we are more inclined to consider ConvNext-Tiny

14

as the preferred backbone model.
C. Comparative Experiments
For the comparative models, the selected models are as
follows: the ”bilateral network” pure convolutional neural
network ABCNet [59] with spatial and contextual pathways,
multi-stage attention residual UNet (MAResU-Net) [43] with
linear attention mechanism, Attention Aggregation Feature
Pyramid Network A2-FPN [60], Swin-Transformer network
DC-Swin [61] with Dense Connection Feature Aggregation
Module (DCFAM), segmentation network ST-Unet [22] with
global-local feature fusion scheme, MPCNet [62], a network
with multi-scale prototype transformer decoder. All of the
above networks are spatial domain methods. We also compared
with XNet [34], a network that directly utilizes frequency domain features for segmentation. Our model ultimately achieved
higher accuracy on the ISPRS Vaihingen and ISPRS Potsdam
datasets, which are widely used for remote sensing segmentation tasks, compared to the aforementioned models.
Results of the Vaihingen Dataset: Tab.V presents numerical comparisons of various mainstream semantic segmentation
methods on the Vaihingen dataset. The research findings
indicate that our proposed SFFNet achieved performance of
91.67% in average F1, 84.80% in mIoU, and 91.91% in OA,
respectively. The best performance of SFFNet in F1, OA,
and mIoU significantly outperformed other networks. SFFNet
not only surpassed the excellent pure convolutional network
ABCNet but also exceeded the DC-Swin network, based on
Swintransformer, which has strong global information representation capability. Additionally, ST-Unet, currently a popular
CNN combined with Transformer network, relies solely on
spatial features. Our SFFNet outperformed ST-Unet by 3.41%
in mIoU, 2.07% in F1, and 1.38% in OA. XNet is a network
that directly uses frequency domain features for segmentation.
Our SFFNet surpassed XNet, which uses purely frequency
domain features, by 1.1% in mIoU, 1.85% in F1, and 0.7% in
OA. This experiment demonstrates that our model has better
segmentation performance.
In addition to comparing the segmentation accuracy of
each model, we also compared the convergence speed of
mainstream models and our proposed SFFNet. The results,
shown in Fig.16, depict the trend of mIoU changes with Epoch
during the training of various models on the Vaihingen dataset.
We selected the results of the first 44 rounds of training as
reference, with the 15th epoch marking the end of the first
cycle of cosine annealing strategy. From the results shown
in Fig.16, our model stabilizes the fastest, indicating that
SFFNet has better fitting ability compared to other networks.
Furthermore, compared to other models, our model exhibits
smaller fluctuations, suggesting that our model can more stably
learn the features of tasks and datasets during the training
process.
Fig.14 displays the segmentation results of SFFNet on ID 10
and 12 of the Vaihingen dataset. For targeted comparison, we
provide locally enlarged images of the segmentation results of
SFFNet and other advanced networks. The results are shown
in Fig.13. From the first, second, and third rows of Fig.13,

it can be seen that models such as ST-UNet and SFFNet
with global modeling have better segmentation results for
large-scale continuity and spatial correlation of features (e.g.,
buildings) compared to purely CNN-based networks such as
ABCNet and MACU-Net. From the first, second, third, and
fourth rows of the figure, it can be observed that methods with frequency domain features like XNet and SFFNet
exhibit significantly better segmentation results in shadow
areas (first row), edges (second and third rows), and regions
with significant texture changes (fourth row) than pure spatial
segmentation methods like ABCNet, MACU-Net, ST-UNet,
and MPCNet. However, from the fifth row, it can be seen that
XNet, which is solely based on frequency domain features,
suffers from spatial information loss, as it splits the car in the
ground into two parts. In contrast, our SFFNet not only retains
sufficient spatial information but also incorporates additional
frequency domain features. SFFNet performs better than pure
spatial segmentation methods in areas with large grayscale
variations while maintaining sufficient spatial information.
Results on the Potsdam Dataset: To comprehensively
evaluate the network performance, we conducted further experiments on the Potsdam dataset. As shown in Tab.VI,
SFFNet achieved remarkable results on the Potsdam test set:
with an average F1 score of 93.36%, mIoU of 87.73%, and
OA index of 91.88%, all surpassing other methods. Due to
differences in dataset size and type, segmentation accuracy
on the Potsdam dataset is generally higher than that on the
Vaihingen dataset. Compared to pure spatial segmentation
methods, SFFNet yielded superior results. Compared to STUnet, which incorporates both spatial global and local features, our SFFNet showed better performance after integrating
frequency domain features, with F1, mIoU, and OA scores
respectively surpassing ST-Unet by 1.35%, 2.27%, and 1.35%
on this dataset. Additionally, our method outperformed XNet,
a method solely using frequency domain features, by 1.31%,
2.22%, and 1.32% in terms of F1, mIoU, and OA on this
dataset.
As illustrated in Fig.17, we also provide overall segmentation images for IDs 3 13 and 3 14. Fig.18 displays the
segmentation results of the network models mentioned in
Tab.VI on the Potsdam dataset. From the second row of
Fig.18 and the first and third rows, it can be observed that
networks with global modeling capabilities, such as SFFNet,
DC-Swin, and ST-Unet, outperform networks without global
dependencies, such as ABCNet and MACU-Net, especially
in segmenting large continuous areas such as buildings and
streets. From the first, second, third, and fourth rows of Fig.18,
networks like XNet and our SFFNet, which utilize frequency
domain information, perform better in segmenting areas with
significant grayscale variations compared to all pure spatial
segmentation networks, such as shadows (first row), edges
(second and third rows), and high-texture regions (fourth row).
However, as shown in the fifth row of Fig.18, XNet suffers
from spatial information loss, as seen in mislabeling trees
as buildings. In contrast, our SFFNet demonstrates superior
spatial awareness while leveraging the advantages of frequency
domain features to address the shortcomings of pure spatial
segmentation, thereby improving the accuracy and robustness

15

TABLE V
C OMPARISON OF S EGMENTATION R ESULTS ON THE VAIHINGEN DATASET.
F1(%)

Method

Evaluation index

Imp.Surf

Building

Lowveg

Tree

Car

MeanF1(%)

mIoU(%)

OA(%)

ABCNet[59]

88.13

90.23

76.71

87.21

68.72

82.20

70.58

85.62

MAResU-Net[43]

92.91

95.26

84.95

89.94

88.33

90.28

83.30

90.86

A2-FPN[60]

92.99

95.53

84.67

90.34

87.62

90.23

82.42

91.04

ST-Unet[22]

92.00

94.85

83.87

90.88

86.40

89.60

81.39

90.53

DC-Swin[61]

93.46

96.00

85.32

90.03

84.88

89.94

82.01

91.29

MPCNet[62]

92.76

95.50

84.70

90.40

90.44

90.76

83.27

90.93

XNet[34]

92.89

95.48

85.17

91.10

88.22

90.57

82.95

91.21

SFFNet(Ours)

93.51

96.25

85.94

91.43

91.24

91.67

84.80

91.91

The best results are indicated in bold black.
TABLE VI
C OMPARISON OF SEGMENTATION RESULTS ON THE P OTSDAM DATASET.
F1(%)

Method

Evaluation index

Imp.Surf

Building

Lowveg

Tree

Car

MeanF1(%)

mIoU(%)

OA(%)

ABCNet[59]

87.05

88.26

78.94

84.63

93.11

86.4

76.35

84.21

MAResU-Net[43]

92.38

95.83

86.65

88.44

96.13

91.89

85.22

90.28

A2-FPN[60]

92.85

95.84

87.17

88.76

96.13

92.15

85.66

90.68

ST-Unet[22]

92.77

96.90

86.45

88.11

95.80

92.01

85.46

90.53

DC-Swin[61]

93.26

96.86

87.74

88.68

95.50

92.41

86.10

91.16

MPCNet[62]

92.69

96.38

87.30

88.74

96.34

92.29

85.91

90.56

XNet[34]

91.98

96.80

86.93

88.76

95.81

92.05

85.51

90.56

SFFNet(Ours)

93.73

97.02

89.02

90.26

96.79

93.36

87.73

91.88

The best results are indicated in bold black.

of remote sensing image segmentation.
By conducting experiments on both the Vaihingen and Potsdam datasets, we have demonstrated the excellent performance
of SFFNet on both datasets, showing significant segmentation
capabilities. SFFNet preserves sufficient spatial information
in features while leveraging frequency domain features to
improve the shortcomings of pure spatial methods.
V. C ONCLUSION
This paper proposes a two-stage segmentation network
called SFFNet, which addresses the challenge of accurately
segmenting areas with large grayscale variations while preserving sufficient spatial information by fully considering both
frequency domain and spatial domain features. Specifically, to
retain the spatial information of spatial domain features, the
first stage involves the extraction of these features. Then, in
the second stage, spatial domain feature mapping (including
global and local spatial features) is performed to preserve
more extensive spatial information. Furthermore, to achieve

more efficient global mapping in remote sensing applications,
Swintransformer is enhanced in this study to better adapt to
remote sensing tasks. To obtain additional frequency domain
information through frequency domain feature mapping (including low-frequency and high-frequency features), a WTFD
(Wavelet Transform Feature Decomposer) is designed, utilizing Haar wavelet transform for frequency domain feature
mapping. Subsequently, efforts are made to facilitate the
integration of low-frequency features with global features and
high-frequency features with local features, bridge the semantic gap between frequency domain and spatial domain features,
and perform feature selection, achieved through the design
of a MDAF (Multiscale Dual-Representation Alignment Filter). This structure employs multiscale vertical convolution
for feature multiscale expansion, followed by the utilization
of a DAF (Dual-Representation Alignment Filter) based on
cross-attention for semantic alignment and ultimately feature
selection. Experimental results demonstrate the superiority of
the SFFNet structure and the effectiveness of each component.

16

The paper aims to inspire more researchers to propose practical
solutions to address the challenge of segmenting areas with
large grayscale variations and encourages further exploration
of the potential and applications of Haar wavelet transform
decomposer in the field of remote sensing.
R EFERENCES
[1] R. Li, S. Zheng, C. Duan, L. Wang, and C. Zhang, “Land
cover classification from remote sensing images based
on multi-scale fully convolutional network,” Geo-spatial
information science 25(2), pp. 278–294, 2022.
[2] D. Marcos, M. Volpi, B. Kellenberger, and D. Tuia,
“Land cover mapping at very high resolution with
rotation equivariant cnns: Towards small yet accurate
models,” ISPRS journal of photogrammetry and remote
sensing 145, pp. 96–107, 2018.
[3] J. Xing, R. Sieber, and T. Caelli, “A scale-invariant
change detection method for land use/cover change research,” ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote
Sensing 141, pp. 252–264, 2018.
[4] I. de Gélis, S. Lefèvre, and T. Corpetti, “Siamese kpconv:
3d multiple change detection from raw point clouds using
deep learning,” ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and
Remote Sensing 197, pp. 274–291, 2023.
[5] A. Samie, A. Abbas, M. M. Azeem, S. Hamid, M. A.
Iqbal, S. S. Hasan, and X. Deng, “Examining the impacts
of future land use/land cover changes on climate in
punjab province, pakistan: implications for environmental sustainability and economic growth,” Environmental
Science and Pollution Research 27, pp. 25415–25433,
2020.
[6] F. Chen, H. Balzter, F. Zhou, P. Ren, and H. Zhou,
“Dgnet: Distribution guided efficient learning for oil spill
image segmentation,” IEEE Transactions on Geoscience
and Remote Sensing 61, pp. 1–17, 2023.
[7] D. Griffiths and J. Boehm, “Improving public data for
building segmentation from convolutional neural networks (cnns) for fused airborne lidar and image data using active contours,” ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry
and Remote Sensing 154, pp. 70–83, 2019.
[8] P. Shamsolmoali, M. Zareapoor, H. Zhou, R. Wang, and
J. Yang, “Road segmentation for remote sensing images using adversarial spatial pyramid networks,” IEEE
Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 59(6),
pp. 4673–4688, 2020.
[9] M. C. A. Picoli, G. Camara, I. Sanches, R. Simões,
A. Carvalho, A. Maciel, A. Coutinho, J. Esquerdo, J. Antunes, R. A. Begotti, et al., “Big earth observation time
series analysis for monitoring brazilian agriculture,” ISPRS journal of photogrammetry and remote sensing 145,
pp. 328–339, 2018.
[10] Y. Shen, J. Chen, L. Xiao, and D. Pan, “Optimizing
multiscale segmentation with local spectral heterogeneity
measure for high resolution remote sensing images,”
ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing 157, pp. 13–25, 2019.
[11] M. Zhang, W. Li, R. Tao, H. Li, and Q. Du, “Information
fusion for classification of hyperspectral and lidar data

using ip-cnn,” IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and
Remote Sensing 60, pp. 1–12, 2021.
[12] X. Liu, L. Jiao, L. Li, L. Cheng, F. Liu, S. Yang, and
B. Hou, “Deep multiview union learning network for
multisource image classification,” IEEE Transactions on
Cybernetics 52(6), pp. 4534–4546, 2020.
[13] X.-Y. Tong, G.-S. Xia, Q. Lu, H. Shen, S. Li, S. You, and
L. Zhang, “Land-cover classification with high-resolution
remote sensing images using transferable deep models,”
Remote Sensing of Environment 237, p. 111322, 2020.
[14] X. Wang, Z. Hu, S. Shi, M. Hou, L. Xu, and X. Zhang,
“A deep learning method for optimizing semantic segmentation accuracy of remote sensing images based on
improved unet,” Scientific Reports 13(1), p. 7600, 2023.
[15] Y. Liu, H. Li, C. Hu, S. Luo, Y. Luo, and C. W.
Chen, “Learning to aggregate multi-scale context for
instance segmentation in remote sensing images,” IEEE
Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems
, 2024.
[16] J. Chen, Y. Lu, Q. Yu, X. Luo, E. Adeli, Y. Wang, L. Lu,
A. L. Yuille, and Y. Zhou, “Transunet: Transformers
make strong encoders for medical image segmentation,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.04306 , 2021.
[17] J. Fu, J. Liu, H. Tian, Y. Li, Y. Bao, Z. Fang, and
H. Lu, “Dual attention network for scene segmentation,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition, pp. 3146–3154, 2019.
[18] Z. Huang, X. Wang, L. Huang, C. Huang, Y. Wei,
and W. Liu, “Ccnet: Criss-cross attention for semantic
segmentation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pp. 603–612,
2019.
[19] K.-H. Liu and B.-Y. Lin, “Mscsa-net: Multi-scale channel
spatial attention network for semantic segmentation of remote sensing images,” Applied Sciences 13(17), p. 9491,
2023.
[20] A. Dosovitskiy, L. Beyer, A. Kolesnikov, D. Weissenborn, X. Zhai, T. Unterthiner, M. Dehghani, M. Minderer, G. Heigold, S. Gelly, et al., “An image is worth
16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at
scale,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.11929 , 2020.
[21] Z. Liu, Y. Lin, Y. Cao, H. Hu, Y. Wei, Z. Zhang,
S. Lin, and B. Guo, “Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using shifted windows,” in Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer
vision, pp. 10012–10022, 2021.
[22] X. He, Y. Zhou, J. Zhao, D. Zhang, R. Yao, and Y. Xue,
“Swin transformer embedding unet for remote sensing
image semantic segmentation,” IEEE Transactions on
Geoscience and Remote Sensing 60, pp. 1–15, 2022.
[23] L. Fan, Y. Zhou, H. Liu, Y. Li, and D. Cao, “Combining
swin transformer with unet for remote sensing image semantic segmentation,” IEEE Transactions on Geoscience
and Remote Sensing , 2023.
[24] C. Xu, R. Wang, S. Lin, X. Luo, B. Zhao, L. Shao,
and M. Hu, “Lecture2note: Automatic generation of
lecture notes from slide-based educational videos,” in
2019 IEEE International Conference on Multimedia and

17

Expo (ICME), pp. 898–903, IEEE, 2019.
[25] C. Xu, W. Jia, R. Wang, X. He, B. Zhao, and Y. Zhang,
“Semantic navigation of powerpoint-based lecture video
for autonote generation,” IEEE Transactions on Learning
Technologies 16(1), pp. 1–17, 2022.
[26] C. Xu, W. Jia, R. Wang, X. Luo, and X. He, “Morphtext:
Deep morphology regularized accurate arbitrary-shape
scene text detection,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia , 2022.
[27] C. Xu, H. Fu, L. Ma, W. Jia, C. Zhang, F. Xia, X. Ai,
B. Li, and W. Zhang, “Seeing text in the dark: Algorithm and benchmark,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.08965
, 2024.
[28] R. S. Stankovic and B. J. Falkowski, “The haar wavelet
transform: its status and achievements,” Computers &
Electrical Engineering 29(1), pp. 25–44, 2003.
[29] C. H. Ma, Y. Li, and Y. Wang, “Image analysis based
on the haar wavelet transform,” Applied Mechanics and
Materials 391, pp. 564–567, 2013.
[30] A. Belov, “Comparison of the efficiencies of image
compression algorithms based on separable and nonseparable two-dimensional haar wavelet bases,” Pattern
Recognition and Image Analysis 18, pp. 602–605, 2008.
[31] F. Luisier, C. Vonesch, T. Blu, and M. Unser, “Fast haarwavelet denoising of multidimensional fluorescence microscopy data,” in 2009 IEEE International Symposium
on Biomedical Imaging: From Nano to Macro, pp. 310–
313, 2009.
[32] F. Gao, X. Wang, Y. Gao, J. Dong, and S. Wang, “Sea ice
change detection in sar images based on convolutionalwavelet neural networks,” IEEE Geoscience and Remote
Sensing Letters 16(8), pp. 1240–1244, 2019.
[33] C. Zhao, B. Xia, W. Chen, L. Guo, J. Du, T. Wang,
and B. Lei, “Multi-scale wavelet network algorithm for
pediatric echocardiographic segmentation via hierarchical feature guided fusion,” Applied Soft Computing 107,
p. 107386, 2021.
[34] Y. Zhou, J. Huang, C. Wang, L. Song, and G. Yang,
“Xnet: Wavelet-based low and high frequency fusion
networks for fully-and semi-supervised semantic segmentation of biomedical images,” in Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
Vision, pp. 21085–21096, 2023.
[35] K. Wang and D. Ming, “Road extraction from highresolution remote sensing images based on spectral
and shape features,” in MIPPR 2009: Automatic Target
Recognition and Image Analysis, 7495, pp. 968–973,
SPIE, 2009.
[36] D. Li, G. Zhang, Z. Wu, and L. Yi, “An edge embedded marker-based watershed algorithm for high spatial
resolution remote sensing image segmentation,” IEEE
Transactions on Image Processing 19(10), pp. 2781–
2787, 2010.
[37] X. Huang, W. Yuan, J. Li, and L. Zhang, “A new
building extraction postprocessing framework for highspatial-resolution remote-sensing imagery,” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Applied Earth Observations and
Remote Sensing 10(2), pp. 654–668, 2016.
[38] J. Wang, Z. Zheng, A. Ma, X. Lu, and Y. Zhong,

“Loveda: A remote sensing land-cover dataset for domain adaptive semantic segmentation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2110.08733 , 2021.
[39] J. Long, E. Shelhamer, and T. Darrell, “Fully convolutional networks for semantic segmentation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition, pp. 3431–3440, 2015.
[40] R. Kemker, C. Salvaggio, and C. Kanan, “Algorithms for
semantic segmentation of multispectral remote sensing
imagery using deep learning,” ISPRS journal of photogrammetry and remote sensing 145, pp. 60–77, 2018.
[41] L. Ma, Y. Liu, X. Zhang, Y. Ye, G. Yin, and B. A.
Johnson, “Deep learning in remote sensing applications:
A meta-analysis and review,” ISPRS journal of photogrammetry and remote sensing 152, pp. 166–177, 2019.
[42] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox, “U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image segmentation,”
in Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted
Intervention–MICCAI 2015: 18th International Conference, Munich, Germany, October 5-9, 2015, Proceedings,
Part III 18, pp. 234–241, Springer, 2015.
[43] R. Li, S. Zheng, C. Duan, J. Su, and C. Zhang, “Multistage attention resu-net for semantic segmentation of
fine-resolution remote sensing images,” IEEE Geoscience
and Remote Sensing Letters 19, pp. 1–5, 2021.
[44] W. Qiu, L. Gu, F. Gao, and T. Jiang, “Building extraction
from very high-resolution remote sensing images using
refine-unet,” IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Letters 20, pp. 1–5, 2023.
[45] L.-C. Chen, G. Papandreou, F. Schroff, and H. Adam,
“Rethinking atrous convolution for semantic image segmentation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.05587 , 2017.
[46] Z. Tian, X. Guo, X. He, P. Li, X. Cheng, and G. Zhou,
“Mscanet: multiscale context information aggregation
network for tibetan plateau lake extraction from remote sensing images,” International Journal of Digital
Earth 16(1), pp. 1–30, 2023.
[47] X. Dai, M. Xia, L. Weng, K. Hu, H. Lin, and M. Qian,
“Multi-scale location attention network for building and
water segmentation of remote sensing image,” IEEE
Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing , 2023.
[48] L. Ding, H. Tang, and L. Bruzzone, “Lanet: Local
attention embedding to improve the semantic segmentation of remote sensing images,” IEEE Transactions
on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 59(1), pp. 426–435,
2020.
[49] R. Strudel, R. Garcia, I. Laptev, and C. Schmid, “Segmenter: Transformer for semantic segmentation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on
computer vision, pp. 7262–7272, 2021.
[50] H. Cao, Y. Wang, J. Chen, D. Jiang, X. Zhang, Q. Tian,
and M. Wang, “Swin-unet: Unet-like pure transformer for
medical image segmentation,” in European conference on
computer vision, pp. 205–218, Springer, 2022.
[51] Y. Liu, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, and S. Mei, “Rethinking transformers for semantic segmentation of remote
sensing images,” IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and
Remote Sensing , 2023.

18

[52] T. Xiao, Y. Liu, Y. Huang, M. Li, and G. Yang, “Enhancing multiscale representations with transformer for
remote sensing image semantic segmentation,” IEEE
Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 61,
pp. 1–16, 2023.
[53] P. Liu, H. Zhang, K. Zhang, L. Lin, and W. Zuo, “Multilevel wavelet-cnn for image restoration,” in Proceedings
of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition workshops, pp. 773–782.
[54] H. Huang, R. He, Z. Sun, and T. Tan, “Wavelet-srnet: A
wavelet-based cnn for multi-scale face super resolution,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on
computer vision, pp. 1689–1697, 2017.
[55] H. Ma, D. Liu, R. Xiong, and F. Wu, “iwave: Cnnbased wavelet-like transform for image compression,”
IEEE Transactions on Multimedia 22(7), pp. 1667–1679,
2019.
[56] Z. Liu, H. Mao, C.-Y. Wu, C. Feichtenhofer, T. Darrell,
and S. Xie, “A convnet for the 2020s,” in Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition, pp. 11976–11986, 2022.
[57] S. Mehta and M. Rastegari, “Mobilevit: light-weight,
general-purpose, and mobile-friendly vision transformer,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.02178 , 2021.
[58] P. K. A. Vasu, J. Gabriel, J. Zhu, O. Tuzel, and A. Ranjan,
“Fastvit: A fast hybrid vision transformer using structural
reparameterization,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.14189 ,
2023.
[59] R. Li, S. Zheng, C. Zhang, C. Duan, L. Wang, and
P. M. Atkinson, “Abcnet: Attentive bilateral contextual
network for efficient semantic segmentation of fineresolution remotely sensed imagery,” ISPRS journal of
photogrammetry and remote sensing 181, pp. 84–98,
2021.
[60] R. Li, L. Wang, C. Zhang, C. Duan, and S. Zheng,
“A2-fpn for semantic segmentation of fine-resolution
remotely sensed images,” International journal of remote
sensing 43(3), pp. 1131–1155, 2022.
[61] L. Wang, R. Li, C. Duan, C. Zhang, X. Meng, and
S. Fang, “A novel transformer based semantic segmentation scheme for fine-resolution remote sensing images,”
IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Letters 19, pp. 1–
5, 2022.
[62] Q. Wang, X. Luo, J. Feng, G. Zhang, X. Jia, and
J. Yin, “Multi-scale prototype contrast network for highresolution aerial imagery semantic segmentation,” IEEE
Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing , 2023.

