FANET: FEATURE AMPLIFICATION NETWORK FOR SEMANTIC SEGMENTATION IN
CLUTTERED BACKGROUND
Muhammad Ali1 , Mamoona Javaid2 , Mubashir Noman1 , Mustansar Fiaz3 , Salman Khan1
1

MBZUAI, UAE

2

Institute of Space Technology, Pakistan

3

IBM Research

arXiv:2407.09379v1 [cs.CV] 12 Jul 2024

ABSTRACT
Existing deep learning approaches leave out the semantic
cues that are crucial in semantic segmentation present in complex scenarios including cluttered backgrounds and translucent objects, etc. To handle these challenges, we propose a
feature amplification network (FANet) as a backbone network
that incorporates semantic information using a novel feature
enhancement module at multi-stages. To achieve this, we propose an adaptive feature enhancement (AFE) block that benefits from both a spatial context module (SCM) and a feature refinement module (FRM) in a parallel fashion. SCM
aims to exploit larger kernel leverages for the increased receptive field to handle scale variations in the scene. Whereas
our novel FRM is responsible for generating semantic cues
that can capture both low-frequency and high-frequency regions for better segmentation tasks. We perform experiments
over challenging real-world ZeroWaste-f [1] dataset which
contains background-cluttered and translucent objects. Our
experimental results demonstrate the state-of-the-art performance compared to existing methods. The source code can
be found at https://github.com/techmn/fanet.
Index Terms— Semantic segmentation, image sharpening, waste segmentation, convolution neural network, feature
enhancement
1. INTRODUCTION
Semantic segmentation is a fundamental computer vision
task having objective to obtain pixel-level predictions and is
critical for various practical applications such as autonomous
driving, scene understanding, robot sensing, and image editing. Traditional convolutional neural networks (CNNs)-based
methods rely on local short-range structure to capture the semantics of the image [2, 3]. However, due to intrinsic fixed
geometric structures, they are limited to short-range contextual information. Various efforts have been made to tackle
this issue including dilated convolution [4, 5, 6] and channel
or spatial attention models [7, 8].
Since the advent of vision transformers [9] which make
use of the self-attention mechanism, semantic segmentation
has been considerably revolutionized. For instance, [10, 11]
effectively utilizes the global contextual relationships of the

Translucent Objects

Background Clutter

Scale Variations

Fig. 1. The main challenges in semantic segmentation, e.g.,
translucent objects, background clutter, and scale variations.
The first row indicates the input image while the bottom row
shows the input image overlay with the ground truth.

transformers to perform reasonably on semantic segmentation tasks. However, they pay less attention to capturing the
semantic-level contextual information. In addition, the dominance of global receptive fields and long-range dependencies hinder its ability to capture the fine details. Moreover,
attention-based models are data-hungry and require a large
amount of data for optimal convergence due to the lack of inductive bias and the struggle to capture local dependencies
due to dominant global representations which restrict their
practicality. To this end, several hybrid attention models [12,
13, 14, 15, 16] are introduced to improve the performance by
utilizing convolutions and self-attention mechanisms. However, these models still face difficulties to perform better when
the segmentation objects lie in a cluttered background. Furthermore, the segmentation of translucent objects is another
challenging task that needs special consideration. As shown
in Fig. 1, these models may suffer from three challenges. (i)The model may encounter notable difficulties when dealing
with translucent objects due to their intrinsic nature of opacity
and unclear boundaries between object and background. (ii)Background clutter makes appearance representations more
ambiguous. (iii)- Diverse scale variations increase the difficulty of capturing subtle objects.
Contributions: In this work, to handle the aforementioned

Contrast enhancement is another image enhancement
technique that improves the contrast in a feature by stretching
the range of intensity values to span a desired range of values
to highlight the low-frequency regions in the feature map.
The contrast-enhanced feature can be obtained as:
Fig. 2. Given an image I (a) and its smoothed version Ib (b),
element-wise multiplication of I and Ib emphasize the color
information and preserve the blob regions (c). Whereas (d)
fine details can be highlighted by subtracting the smoothed
image Ib from the original image I. Motivated by this, we
introduce our feature refinement module (FRM).
challenges for the semantic segmentation task, we propose a
feature amplification network (FANet) as shown in Fig. 3(a). We introduce FANet as a backbone to capture the enhanced features and generate multi-stage features using our
novel adaptive feature enhancement (AFE) block, as shown
in Fig. 3-(b). Our plug-and-play AFE block aims to benefit from a larger kernel and semantic cues in a parallel manner, which can extract more comprehensive features to preserve the coarse-to-fine details so that the boundaries of the
objects are easily distinguishable. The focus of the design
is to encode the intrinsic properties of the target objects and
segment the objects from the complex scenes, especially in
the presence of cluttered backgrounds. Our block is responsible for explicitly exposing the spatial descriptors while simultaneously performing feature enhancement to preserve both
high-frequency and low-frequency components in an image.
To excavate the spatial context, we propose a spatial context
module (SCM) that uses a large kernel to handle the scales of
the objects in complex scenes. Meanwhile, to inscribe the semantic cues, we introduce a novel feature refinement module
(FRM) which aims to capture low-frequency components as
well as highlight the fine details of the objects. Experimental
results indicate a considerable improvement in the complex
ZeroWaste-f [1] dataset compared to the existing state-of-theart methods.
2. BACKGROUND
Typically, image sharpening and contrast enhancement are the
two fundamental concepts that are applied in the spatial domain to improve the quality of the image, as shown in Fig. 2.
The sharpening is performed to emphasize the high-frequency
or fine details in a given visual feature. To do so, the visual
feature is subtracted from the Laplacian function to obtain a
sharpened result. Suppose, f (x, y) is the given input feature
then the resultant sharpened feature g(x, y) is obtained using
Laplacian follows:
g(x, y) = f (x, y) − c[∆2 f (x, y)],

(1)

where c is the Laplacian mask center coefficient which is empirically determined.

q(x, y) = f (x, y) ⊙ m(x, y),

(2)

where q(x, y) and ⊙ represent the output feature and
Hadamard product operation, respectively. The m(.) is designed to stretch the contrast and enhance features and can be
defined as follows:
m(x, y) = γ(

1
) − 0.5),
1 + e−α((x,y)−β

(3)

where γ is a scaling factor used to control the strength
of the enhancement. The α and β control the contrast of the
enhancement function.
Finally, the outputs from Eq. 1 and Eq. 2 can be combined to get the enriched features in the spatial domain that
can capture both high-frequency and low-frequency regions.
Motivated by this, we leverage our feature amplification module described in Sec. 3.3 for token-mixer design.
3. METHOD
3.1. Overall Architecture
Fig. 3-(a) shows the overall architecture of our proposed feature amplification network (FANet) for the semantic segmentation task. The focus of our design is a backbone network
that can capture the intrinsic properties of the object and segment it from the cluttered background, using our novel adaptive feature enhancement (AFE) block. Specifically, our novel
FANet can capture the enriched features and generate multistage features (S1, S2, S3, and S4). To obtain the multi-stage
features, the input x ∈ RH×W ×3 is input to non-overlapping
convolution stem layers (kernel size = 5×5, stride = 4) to generate the tokens of size RH/4×W/4 . Following hierarchical
design [18, 19, 20], our FANet comprises four stages to obtain hierarchical feature representations. There exists a downsampling convolution layer (kernel size = 3×3, stride = 2) between two stages to reduce the spatial resolution of the features. The multi-stage features are input to a UperNet [17]
decoder to get the final segmentation mask.
3.2. Adaptive Feature Enhancement (AFE) Block
The proposed AFE block comprises four key components:
convolutional embeddings (CE), spatial context module
(SCM), feature refinement module (FRM), and convolutional multi-layer perceptron (ConvMLP). The focus of this
design is to adaptively capture the enriched features of cluttered backgrounds for semantic segmentation. The input
features are passed through a LayerNorm and a CE to learn

Conv
1x1
𝐻𝑖 × 𝑊𝑖 × 𝐶𝑖 /2

Conv MLP

Spatial Context
Module (SCM)
Feature
Refinement
Module (FRM)

C

Conv
1x1

Layer Norm

𝐻𝑖 × 𝑊𝑖 × 𝐶𝑖 /2

DWConv 3x3

Layer Norm

CE

Conv
1x1

DWConv
3x3

Conv
1x1

Down
Sampling

Stage 4: AFE
Block

𝐻𝑖 × 𝑊𝑖 × 𝐶𝑖

Input

(b) Adaptive Feature Enhancement (AFE) Block
Conv
Stem

Stage 1: AFE
Block

Down
Sampling

x2
𝐻 𝑊
𝑆1: × × 𝐶1
4 4

Stage 2: AFE
Block

Down
Sampling

Stage 3: AFE
Block

x2

x8

x2

𝐻 𝑊
𝑆2: × × 𝐶2
8 8

𝐻 𝑊
𝑆3:
×
× 𝐶3
16 16

𝐻 𝑊
𝑆4:
×
× 𝐶4
32 32

(a) Feature Amplification Network (FANet)

Fig. 3. The (a) is the overall illustration of our proposed feature amplification network (FANet), as a backbone network, for
background-cluttered semantic segmentation. The input is passed to a backbone network (FANet) to produce the multi-stage
features (S1, S2, S3, and S4). These multi-stage features are input to a UperNet decoder [17] as a segmentation head for
prediction. The (b) shows our novel adaptive feature enhancement (AFE) block. Our (b) AFE block is designed to capture
the rich information. It comprises convolutional embeddings (CE), spatial context module (SCM), feature refinement module
(FRM), and ConvMLP. Our AFF block adaptively aggregates the large kernel information using SCM which increases the
receptive field and FRM which refines the features in the spatial dimension.
the generalization and discriminative ability [12]. The output
of CE is passed to a 1x1 convolution layer that squeezes the
channels to half. The channel squeeze helps to reduce the
computational overhead and encourages the model to perform feature mixing. The squeezed features are passed to the
SCM module which comprises group-wise convolution with
a larger kernel (kernel size = 7x7). The objective of SCM is
to increase the receptive field which can capture the spatial
context over a broader range to handle scale variations. In
parallel, the squeezed features from the CE layer are also fed
to the feature refinement module (FRM) to refine the features
(see details in Sec. 3.3). The outputs from SCM and FRM
are fused and projected through a 1x1 convolution layer and
a ConvMLP to further enhance the representations.
3.3. Feature Refinement Module (FRM)
Inspired by the image sharpening and contrast enhancement
concept, we introduce a novel feature refinement module
(FRM) to capture the low-frequency context and emphasize

the blob regions while simultaneously highlighting the highfrequency details. The block diagram for FRM is depicted in
Fig. 4. Suppose F ∈ RC×H×W be the input of FRM. We
pass it from a depthwise convolution layer to obtain downsampled feature maps P ∈ RC×H/2×W/2 . In the image
processing domain, high frequencies are highlighted by taking the difference between the image and its blurred version.
We adopt a similar procedure by up-sampling the smoothed
feature maps P to the same spatial resolution of F to obtain
Q features. Later, the difference between F and Q highlights
the fine details resulting in R refined feature embeddings (as
shown in Fig. 4).
The second branch (bottom) in FRM strives to capture the
low-frequency regions in the feature maps. Given a normalized image, the blob features can be emphasized by elementwise multiplication of the image with its blurred version. To
do so, we perform element-wise multiplication operations between the F and Q features to obtain S which capture the
low-frequency components. The idea is to highlight the low
frequencies by focusing on the blobs in the feature maps.

Ϝ

DWConv 3x3
Stride =2

𝑅 DWConv 3x3
𝑃 Upsample

𝑄

C 𝑇 Conv 1x1

𝑆 DWConv 3x3

𝐹ത

Feature Refinement Module (FRM)
Fig. 4. The illustration of our novel feature amplification
module. The input features F are downsampled using depthwise convolution (DWConv) and upsampled to get Q features. The input features F are subtracted from Q features
to get R features that highlight the fine details. Similarly,
the input features are multiplied with Q features to obtain
S features which highlight the low-frequency components in
the spatial dimension. Later, these low-frequency and highfrequency features are aggregated after DWConv to obtain enhanced features. Finally, the aggregated features are input to
the projection layer to obtain the final F̄ features.
Table 1. Comparison of ours FANet with state-of-the-art
methods for semantic segmentation on the test set of the
ZeroWaste-f dataset. We report the results in terms of mIoU
and pixel accuracy (Pix. Acc.). Here, the FocalNet-B provides improved performance compared to the DeepLabv3+.
Our FANet when utilized as a backbone network improves
mIoU performance by 1.63% over the FocalNet-B. The best
results are in bold.

Methods
CCT [21]
ReCo [22]
DeepLabv3+ [23]
FocalNet-B [18]
FANet (ours)

mIoU
29.32
52.28
52.13
53.26
54.89

Pix. Acc.
85.91
89.33
91.38
91.28
91.41

Our FRM emphasizes the low and high-frequency regions and
concatenates them after depthwise convolution in the channel
dimension (to obtain T ). Finally, these features are realized
with a projection layer to obtain the final enriched/amplified
features F̄ .
4. EXPERIMENTATION
4.1. Dataset and Evaluation Protocol
We have chosen to focus on the ZeroWaste-f dataset [1] which
is introduced to advance the field of waste management and
segmentation, particularly in environments with extreme clut-

ter, while also boosting innovations in recycling applications.
It encompasses a diverse range of waste types, including various paper, cardboard, plastics, metals, and organic materials,
often in cluttered and overlapping states. Our motivation in
selecting this dataset is twofold: firstly, to push the boundaries of what’s possible in the realm of automated waste segmentation, and develop a model that can accurately differentiate and classify a wide array of waste materials. Secondly, we aim to contribute to environmental sustainability
efforts. By improving the precision of waste segmentation,
we can enhance recycling processes and waste management
practices, ultimately contributing to a more sustainable and
environmentally conscious approach to waste disposal. This
dataset comprised 3002 training, 572 validation, and 929 test
sets. Following [1], we use the mean intersection over union
(mIoU) and pixel accuracy to measure the performance of the
models. The mIoU is a crucial metric for assessing segmentation accuracy by quantifying the overlap between prediction
and ground truth.
4.2. Implementation Details
We implemented our method in PyTorch and trained over
NVIDIA V100 GPU. For this purpose, we leverage the MMSegmentation open-source toolbox [24]. The training of our
model is conducted using the UperNet architecture, with
the backbone initialized using weights pre-trained on the
ImageNet-1K [25] dataset. This model undergoes a training
regimen of 40k iterations on the ZeroWaste dataset. We employ the AdamW optimizer [26] for this process, starting with
an initial learning rate of 9e−5 . In line with standard research
methodologies, our training approach includes a learning rate
decay, specifically utilizing a polynomial decay strategy with
a power exponent of 1.0. We configure our training setup
with a crop size of 512x512 and a batch size of 2. Following
[20, 27], we first trained the backbone on the ImageNet1K [25] dataset for 300 epochs with batch size 80 using 16
NVIDIA V100 GPUs and a learning rate of 1e-3. We adopt
the AdamW optimizer [28] for training and set weight decay
of 0.05. After pertaining, we finetuned the model on the
semantic segmentation dataset.
4.3. Quantitative Comparison
Tab. 1 presents the comparison over ZeroWaste-f [1] of
our method with other state-of-the-art methods including
CCT [21], ReCo [22], DeepLabV3+ [23], and FocalNet-B
[18]. The DeepLabV3+ [23] achieves a leading IoU score
of 52.13% on the ZeroWaste-f dataset. In addition, the
FocalNet-B [18] is one of the best-performing models for
semantic segmentation, and also obtained mIoU of 53.26%.
We notice that our model surpasses these compared methods and obtains mIoU and pixel accuracy of 54.89% and
91.41%, respectively. Such improvements are indicative of
our novel adaptive feature enhancement module’s efficiency.

Input

DeepLabV3+

FocalNet-B

Ours

GroundTruth

Fig. 5. Qualitative comparison on ZeroWaste-f dataset. Our method better segments the objects from cluttered backgrounds
compared to existing state-of-the-art methods.
Table 2. Ablation study of our FANet pretrained over ImageNet-1K for 300 epochs. First, we use the depthwise convolutional
embeddings using a skip connection called CE and ConvMLP as our baseline. Row 2 shows that introducing SCM into the
baseline achieves a performance gain. Similarly, integrating FRM (rows 3, 4, and 5) into the baseline leads to a consistent
gain in the performance. Our final approach FANet (last row), which comprises both SCM and FRM, achieves a significant
improvement in performance over the baseline. The best results are in bold.

Exp. No.
1. CE+ConvMLP (baseline)
2. baseline
3. baseline
4. baseline
5. baseline
6. FANet (Ours)

SCM

FRM
High Frequency Context Low Frequency Context

✓
✓

✓

✓
✓
✓

✓
✓

Table 3. Comparison of FANet with FocalNet on test set.
Methods
Params mIoU Pix. Acc.
FocalNet-T [18] 28.6 M 51.71
91.03
FocalNet-B [18] 88.7 M 54.26
91.28
FANet (ours)
36.7 M 54.89
91.41

Table 4. Comparison on the validation set of ImageNet-1K.
Methods
Params (M) Flops (G) Top1 Acc.
FocalNet-T
28.6
4.5
82.3
FANet (ours)
36.7
5.8
82.5

Our method sets a new state-of-the-art performance with this
significant gain obtained in the challenging mIoU metric.
4.4. Qualitative Comparison
Fig. 5 illustrates the qualitative comparison of our method
with DeepLabV3+ [23] and FocalNet-B [18]. We observe that
our FANet can accurately segment the object in complex scenarios. For example, in the first row, our method can segment
the translucent object better compared to the others. Simi-

mIoU

Pix. Acc.

38.15
47.66
49.03
43.99
50.45
54.89

89.26
91.07
90.98
90.65
90.95
91.41

larly, in the second row, our method can segment objects in
the presence of a heavily cluttered background. These results
show our method’s capability to adapt a variety of image characteristics and correctly classify each item which validates the
robustness of our segmentation method.
4.5. Ablation Study
For all the ablation study experiments, the FANet backbone is
pre-trained on ImageNet for 300 epochs.
Effectiveness of SCM and FRM: Tab. 2 showcases the impact of our contributions. Our baseline consists of a depthwise convolution embedding with a skip connection, dubbed
as CE, and ConvMLP. Introducing the SCM (row-2) into the
baseline which is responsible for capturing the semantic information over the larger context leads to improved performance
gain compared to the baseline. On the other hand, integrating
the FRM which refines the features highlighting both lowfrequency and high-frequency regions also obtains a significant gain compared to the baseline as shown in rows 3, 4,
and 5, respectively. Finally, the integration of SCM and FRM
into the baseline achieves the best performance which indicates that efficiently captures the larger context information

Feature Visualization of FRM: In Fig. 6, we show the effectiveness of our FRM using feature visualization. To do
so, we take the stage 3 features and show the input features
to our FRM, output features for both R and S, and output
of the FRM as (b), (c), (d), and (e), respectively. Whereas,
(a), (f), and (g) show the input image, our prediction overlay
with the input image, and ground truth overlay with the input image, respectively. From these feature visualizations, we
can observe that our FRM can preserve both low-frequency
and high-frequency components in the presence of a heavily cluttered environment for better semantic segmentation.
This ability to preserve detailed textural information alongside broader contextual elements significantly contributes to
the accuracy.
Comparison of FANet over ImageNet-1K: Finally, in
Tab. 4, we compare our FANet method with FocalNet-T
over the validation set of ImageNet-1K. Although our approach has more parameters, it has improved accuracy in
terms of top-1. Moreover, from Tab. 3, it is notable that our
FANet has significantly improved performance for the target
ZeroWaste-f dataset compared to FocalNet-T. This shows
that FocalNet-T has limited ability to tackle the cluttered
background challenge for the semantic segmentation task.
5. CONCLUSION
Fig. 6. Illustration of the impact of feature refinement module (FRM). (a) is the input to the model, (b) shows the output
feature maps of the third stage and input to the FRM, (c) and
(d) show the highlighted features in the FRM as R and S,
respectively. The (e) shows the enhanced features as output
provided by FRM, and (f) highlights the resulting segmentation map provided by the model overlay with the input image.
The (g) is the ground truth overlay with the input image.
as well as preserves the low-frequency and high-frequency
components. This integration improves the model’s capacity
to better capture the spatial descriptors as well as coarse-tofine details, which show the metrics of our contributions.
Comparison of ours FANet with the FocalNet: We compared our method with FocalNet-T and FocalNet-B frameworks with our method in Tab. 3. From the table, it is clearly
shown that our method exhibits better capability to handle
the cluttered backgrounds. Although FocalNet-T has less
the number of parameters, it exhibits a significantly reduced
mIoU of 3.18% compared to ours. In addition, our method
has significantly reduced the number of parameters compared to the FocalNet-B frameworks and still achieves better
performance. This reduction in parameters signifies a more
efficient model, both in terms of computational resources
and processing speed, without compromising the quality of
segmentation. It underscores the potential of our approach in
setting new standards for segmentation tasks, particularly in
complex and resource-constrained environments.

In this work, we propose a feature amplification network
(FANet) to capture the semantic context information and generate multi-stage features for better semantic segmentation
in complex scenarios especially in heavily cluttered objects.
Particularly, we propose an adaptive feature enhancement
(AFE) block that exploits both larger contexts using the spatial context module (SCM) and semantic cues in the feature
refinement module (FRM) in a parallel fashion. Our FRM,
inspired by image sharpening and contrast enhancement, exploits low-frequency and high-frequency regions in the latent
space to perform feature refinement. Our extensive experimental study reveals the effectiveness of our method.

References
[1]

Dina Bashkirova et al. “ZeroWaste dataset: towards deformable object segmentation in cluttered scenes”. In:
CVPR. 2022, pp. 21147–21157.

[2]

Jonathan Long, Evan Shelhamer, and Trevor Darrell.
“Fully convolutional networks for semantic segmentation”. In: CVPR. 2015, pp. 3431–3440.

[3]

Mustansar Fiaz, Arif Mahmood, and Soon Ki Jung.
“Convolutional neural network with structural input
for visual object tracking”. In: Proceedings of the 34th
ACM/SIGAPP Symposium on Applied Computing.
2019, pp. 1345–1352.

[4]

Panqu Wang et al. “Understanding convolution for semantic segmentation”. In: WACV. Ieee. 2018, pp. 1451–
1460.

[5]

[6]

[19]

Huikai Wu et al. “Fastfcn: Rethinking dilated convolution in the backbone for semantic segmentation”. In:
arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.11816 (2019).

Yongming Rao et al. “Hornet: Efficient high-order spatial interactions with recursive gated convolutions”. In:
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
35 (2022), pp. 10353–10366.

[20]

Roland Gao. “Rethinking Dilated Convolution for
Real-Time Semantic Segmentation”. In: CVPR. 2023,
pp. 4674–4683.

Ze Liu et al. Swin Transformer: Hierarchical Vision
Transformer using Shifted Windows. 2021. arXiv:
2103.14030 [cs.CV].

[21]

Yassine Ouali, Céline Hudelot, and Myriam Tami.
“Semi-Supervised Semantic Segmentation With CrossConsistency Training”. In: 2020 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR). 2020, pp. 12671–12681. DOI: 10 . 1109 /
CVPR42600.2020.01269.

[7]

Ye Huang et al. “Channelized Axial Attention–Considering
Channel Relation within Spatial Attention for Semantic Segmentation”. In: AAAI. Vol. 36. 1. 2022,
pp. 1016–1025.

[8]

Jia Chen et al. “Channel and spatial attention based
deep object co-segmentation”. In: Knowledge-Based
Systems 211 (2021), p. 106550.

[22]

Shikun Liu et al. Bootstrapping Semantic Segmentation with Regional Contrast. 2022. arXiv: 2104 .
04465 [cs.CV].

[9]

Alexey Dosovitskiy et al. “An image is worth 16x16
words: Transformers for image recognition at scale”.
In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.11929 (2020).

[23]

[10]

Enze Xie et al. “SegFormer: Simple and efficient design for semantic segmentation with transformers”. In:
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
34 (2021), pp. 12077–12090.

Liang-Chieh Chen et al. “Deeplab: Semantic image
segmentation with deep convolutional nets, atrous
convolution, and fully connected crfs”. In: IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence
40.4 (2017), pp. 834–848.

[24]

MMS Contributors. MMSegmentation: OpenMMLab
Semantic Segmentation Toolbox and Benchmark. 2020.

[25]

Jia Deng et al. “Imagenet: A large-scale hierarchical image database”. In: 2009 IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition. Ieee. 2009,
pp. 248–255.

[11]

Hengcan Shi, Munawar Hayat, and Jianfei Cai. “Transformer scale gate for semantic segmentation”. In:
CVPR. 2023, pp. 3051–3060.

[12]

Haiping Wu et al. “Cvt: Introducing convolutions to
vision transformers”. In: ICCV. 2021, pp. 22–31.

[26]

[13]

Wenhai Wang et al. “Internimage: Exploring largescale vision foundation models with deformable convolutions”. In: CVPR. 2023, pp. 14408–14419.

Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A Method
for Stochastic Optimization. 2017. arXiv: 1412 .
6980 [cs.LG].

[27]

Meng-Hao Guo et al. “Visual attention network”. In:
Computational Visual Media 9.4 (2023), pp. 733–752.

[28]

Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. “Decoupled weight
decay regularization”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.05101
(2017).

[14]

Ali Hatamizadeh et al. “Global context vision transformers”. In: International Conference on Machine
Learning. PMLR. 2023, pp. 12633–12646.

[15]

Mubashir Noman et al. “ELGC-Net: Efficient LocalGlobal Context Aggregation for Remote Sensing
Change Detection”. In: IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing (2024).

[16]

Mustansar Fiaz et al. “Sat: Scale-augmented transformer for person search”. In: Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision. 2023, pp. 4820–4829.

[17]

Tete Xiao et al. “Unified perceptual parsing for scene
understanding”. In: ECCV. 2018, pp. 418–434.

[18]

Jianwei Yang et al. “Focal modulation networks”. In:
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
35 (2022), pp. 4203–4217.

