IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 61, 2023

5618815

SmallTrack: Wavelet Pooling and Graph Enhanced
Classification for UAV Small Object Tracking
Yuanliang Xue , Guodong Jin , Tao Shen , Lining Tan , Nian Wang , Jing Gao, and Lianfeng Wang
Abstract— Aerial object tracking has recently shown great
potential in the field of remote sensing. However, small objects
with limited feature information pose a huge challenge to aerial
trackers. Despite significant improvements, most trackers still
struggle to capture enough discriminative features and overcome
background disturbances. In this work, we propose an efficient
aerial tracker (SmallTrack) based on the Siamese network to
improve the discrimination of small objects. It consists of two
effective modules, namely the wavelet pooling layer (WPL) and
graph enhanced module (GEM). First, WPL decomposes the
input into four subbands via wavelet domain learning and
fully utilizes the high- and low-frequency information in the
subbands to preserve the discriminative features of small objects.
Second, GEM embeds the pixels on the classification responses
as nodes in graph learning through graph neural networks
(GNNs), which naturally mines the similarity between pixels.
Based on the pixel-level modulation constructed from graph
theory, GEM enhances the understanding of small objects and
highlights them in the classification responses. The proposed
tracker achieves leading performance on five aerial benchmarks,
while maintaining a high running speed of 72.5 frames/s. Besides,
real-world tests on an aerial platform have proven the effectiveness of SmallTrack. The code and models are available at
https://github.com/xyl-507/SmallTrack.
Index Terms— Aerial tracking, graph enhanced classification, remote sensing, Siamese neural network, wavelet pooling
layer (WPL).

I. I NTRODUCTION

A

ERIAL object tracking is a basic task in remote sensing.
There have been booming developments of unmanned
aerial vehicles (UAVs) and the cameras they carry. With
the advantages of low cost, small size, and high mobility,
UAVs are widely used in many fields of remote sensing,
such as traffic patrolling [1], border security [2], and military
reconnaissance. In the context of intelligent video processing,
object tracking has gradually become a key technology for
UAV-based remote sensing, as well as a prerequisite for
performing other tasks (localization, precision strike, etc.).
Given an arbitrary, user-specified target in the first frame,
object tracking aims to continuously and steadily estimate the
state (position and scale) of the target in subsequent frames.
Although unprecedented progress has been made in recent
Manuscript received 1 May 2023; revised 8 July 2023 and 3 August 2023;
accepted 11 August 2023. Date of publication 15 August 2023; date of current
version 5 September 2023. This work was supported by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China under Grant 61673017 and Grant 61403398.
(Corresponding author: Guodong Jin.)
The authors are with the Xi’an Research Institute of Hi-Tech, Xi’an
710025, China (e-mail: xyl_507@outlook.com; jinguodong_army@qq.com;
luckyshentao@163.com; tamlining@163.com; nianwang04@outlook.com;
382468595@qq.com; alfeng185@sina.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TGRS.2023.3305728

Fig. 1. Qualitative evaluations on DTB70. The sequences from top to bottom
are Animal3, SnowBoarding4, and StreetBasketball3. Most trackers usually fail
to track when the target becomes small. Owing to the enhancement of small
objects, SmallTrack can robustly and accurately track targets under various
challenges.

years, many challenges still remain. In particular, targets from
aerial views are usually very small and have weak appearances and features. Thus, tracking them is very challenging.
Therefore, robust small-object-aware trackers are essential for
UAV-based remote sensing applications.
Accurate perception of small objects is always challenging
for many remote sensing tasks, including object detection and
tracking. Various approaches have been proposed to improve
the performance of small object tracking. They can be mainly
divided into feature reweighting and enhancement of the
target response. The most common approaches for feature
reweighting are via attention modules (DACapT [3], contextual
information fusion tracker (CIFT) [4], and DAFSiamRPN [5])
or multilayer feature fusion (HiFT [6], SiamAPN [7],
COMET [8], SiamAPN++ [9]). These trackers are based on
feature extraction to enhance small object features, but the
preservation of small object information is ignored in feature
extraction. Wang et al. [10] indicate that feature extraction
is the most important component of object tracking. The
feature information of small objects is limited to start with;
in addition, downsampling in feature extraction further loses
small object information. As a result, these trackers lack
the necessary information, resulting in insufficient discrimination for small objects. Different from enhancing small
object features, several trackers improve the responses of
small objects. These trackers suppress background noise and
similar distractors by constraining the learning of correlation
filters (keyfilter-aware object tracker (KAOT) [11], aberrance
repressed correlation filter (ARCF) [12], and AutoTrack [13])

1558-0644 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Xi'an Jiaotong-Liverpool University. Downloaded on April 11,2025 at 08:28:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5618815

or introducing training samples (boundary effect-aware visual
tracker (BEVT) [14], training-set distillation (TSD) [15], and
TCTrack [16]). These trackers do not explore the potential
relations between targets and distractors and improve the
discrimination of small objects by imperfectly imposing regularization and constraint terms on the responses. However,
small objects with low confidences are also easily treated as
distractors. Thus, these trackers cannot effectively enhance the
understanding of small objects.
In summary, these trackers lack exploration of feature and
classification responses, meaning that they fail to improve
the feature quality of small objects and fail to highlight
small object responses. In order to provide an effective
solution to these two issues, we propose a discriminative
and robust tracker named SmallTrack. Our tracker contains
a wavelet pooling layer (WPL) and a graph enhancement
module. WPL aims to suppress noise and avoid the loss of
small object information during downsampling. The graph
enhanced module (GEM) exploits potential relations between
nodes and highlights the classification responses of small
objects. Specifically, the WPL, inspired by WaveCNet [17],
is applied to the backbone network as a better alternative to
standard neighborhood pooling. The WPL not only prevents
the aliasing effect during downsampling, which avoids the
loss of small object feature information but also effectively
removes noise from the features thereby providing more
useful information for classification and regression. Second,
we propose the GEM to enhance small object responses.
Based on the theory of graph neural networks (GNNs) [18],
GEM regards the classification responses as nodes and edges
and encodes the relations between nodes and their local
neighbors. GEM can produce additional weights based on
the relational inductive bias to refine classification responses,
which can effectively augment the activations in the target
areas and reduce the activations in the background areas. Thus,
classification with GEM embedded can make small objects
highly distinguishable. In addition, the targets being tracked
are usually irregular objects, and graphs are more adaptable in
dealing with irregular objects [19], [20]. This means that our
GEM constructed using graph theory can endow our tracker
with adaptive scale perception.
The main contributions of our work can be summarized as
follows:
1) WPL, which serves as downsampling and denoising,
is proposed to adequately retain information about the
structure and details of small objects and to boost the
robustness of noise information.
2) To enhance the understanding of small objects in classification, GEM aggregates and updates the relations
between nodes using a GNN to enhance the responses
of small object areas.
3) We present a high-speed tracker that achieves outstanding tracking performance on several challenging aerial
benchmarks. Additionally, experiments on the small
object tracking dataset strongly demonstrate impressive
practicability and performance with an average speed of
72.5 frames/s and thus striking a balance between speed
and accuracy.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 61, 2023

The rest of this article is organized as follows. Section II
gives a brief survey of the related works. Then Section III
introduces our SmallTrack model and its two modules.
Based on the proposed tracker, the details and comprehensive experimental results are reported in Section IV. Finally,
Section V concludes this article.
II. R ELATED W ORK
Visual object tracking is a research hotspot and plays a critical role in many fields. An exhaustive survey of object tracking
research is introduced in the survey [21]. The following is a
brief review of small object trackers, as well as related issues
such as the wavelet transform and GNNs.
A. Small Object Trackers
The limited target area and unclear visual structure of small
objects result in less available information. This poses a great
challenge for small object trackers. Several works propose
attention modules to reweight the features of small objects.
Specifically, DACapT [3] proposes a group attention module
and a penalty attention module to dynamically adjust the
values of neurons by estimating whether they are beneficial
or harmful to tracking. CIFT [4] further enhances the target
appearance information on the template features via an attention information fusion module. DAFSiamRPN [5] designs
the convolutional attention module to enhance the weighting
of feature spatial location. Multilayer feature fusion is also
a common approach for feature reweighting. To reduce the
prediction interferences for small objects, HiFT [6] integrates
low-level semantic information and high-level spatial information by the hierarchical feature transformer. SiamAPN [7]
tries to retain as much target information as possible through
the feature fusion network. Similarly, COMET [8] utilizes
a multilayer aggregation and fusion module to retain small
object information. Later, SiamAPN++ [9] employed an
attentional aggregation network to increase the perception of
small objects. MKDNet [22] proposes image degradation and
multilevel knowledge distillation to mimic and enhance tiny
objects, respectively. In addition, SiamPIN [23] adopts a local
process block to retain the detailed appearance information of
the small object.
Due to the less available information on small objects,
the attention module and feature fusion fail to substantially improve their feature quality. Therefore, some studies
choose to enhance the classification response of small objects.
KAOT [11] introduces a key filter to restrain the learning of
correlation filters which limits the influence of background
noise on small objects. ARCF [12] introduces regularization
terms and the Euclidean norm to suppress aberrations in
responses. ARCF mainly deals with distractions from similar
targets. However, there is more than one factor affecting small
objects and hence the tracking performance is suboptimal.
AutoTrack [13] controls the learning of the correlation filter
with the local response variation and global variation as
constraints thus avoiding contamination by noise information.
Moreover, BEVT [14] improves the discrimination of small
objects by online enhanced learning background samples,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Xi'an Jiaotong-Liverpool University. Downloaded on April 11,2025 at 08:28:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XUE et al.: SmallTrack: WAVELET POOLING AND GRAPH ENHANCED CLASSIFICATION

but the introduction of noise is unavoidable. To exploit the
importance of temporal information in consecutive frames,
TSD [15] proposes a time slot-based distillation approach
to dynamically optimize the quality of the training set.
TCTrack [16] integrates information from previous frames in
feature extraction and similarity refinement. However, temporal information is limited for small object tracking.
However, these works can only obtain limited feature
enhancement and classification response enhancement. They
ignore the information loss in feature extraction and the
potential relations on classification responses. In contrast to
the above works, our approach aims to preserve as much
information about small objects as possible during feature
extraction and explore the potential relations between nodes
to highlight the responses of small objects.
B. Wavelet Transform in Deep Learning
In signal processing, to avoid aliasing and noise, the data are
usually decomposed into different frequency intervals using
time-frequency analysis tools, such as wavelet [24], [25].
How to effectively retain detailed information is also the key
to pixel-level image processing tasks such as segmentation,
denoising, and superresolution. Traditional downsampling performed by pooling layers usually produces an aliasing effect
in the details, making it difficult to produce excellent results.
Thus, some works explore the combination of wavelet transform and convolutional neural network (CNNs) to reduce noise
and suppress the aliasing effect. Ferrà et al. [26], Williams and
Li [27], Zhao et al. [28], Li et al. [29], and Xue et al. [30]
adopt wavelet decomposition for downsampling. Later,
WaveCNet [17] proposed a wavelet-integrated CNN to suppress the aliasing effect and noise for noise-robust image
classification. Learning Discrete Wavelet (LDW)-Pooling [31]
designs the learnable pooling scheme so that the weights of the
wavelet kernel can be learned from training data. Furthermore,
several studies have attempted to address downsampling with
the wavelet packet transform [32], curvelet transform [33], and
dual-tree complex wavelet transform (DT-CWT) [34], [35].
From aerial views, images of small objects are more easily
weakened by aliasing effects and noise [17]. However, developing the wavelet transform for object tracking is still a work
in progress. Only [36] fuses RGB and thermal infrared images
by DT-CWT, which complementarily improves the stability of
object tracking. However, the wavelet transform is used here as
a preprocessing technology for pixel-level fusion, which fails
to fully explore its anti-aliasing and denoising advantages.
C. GNNs for Object Tracking
GNNs have been demonstrated to offer great potential
in processing irregular data structures [37]. Since irregular
objects are more common in object tracking, the application
of GNNs in object tracking has great potential. Many multiple
object trackers [38], [39], [40] combine GNNs to consider
the relations between targets. In addition, GNNs have also
been applied in some single object trackers. For example,
GCT [41] incorporates two types of graph convolutional
networks into a Siamese framework for appearance modeling.

5618815

Nevertheless, its weaker baseline prevents performance from
being improved further. SiamGAT [19] proposes the graph
attention mechanism to establish part-to-part correspondences
between the target and the search region with a complete bipartite graph. However, SiamGAT requires backgrounds to be
removed because this part-based cross correlation is sensitive
to background noise. Small objects carrying few features are
susceptible to distractions and thus trying to establish partto-part dependences is a tough task. In this article, we find
that classification with graph models can produce useful
representations for pixel relations, which significantly helps
to improve the small object tracking performance.
III. P ROPOSED M ETHOD
In this section, we describe the proposed SmallTrack framework in detail. Our tracker follows the framework of Siamese
trackers and consists of a template branch and a search branch,
as visualized in Fig. 2. The WPL and the GEM make up our
proposed method’s two main parts. First, the architecture of
Siamese frameworks employed in this work will be introduced.
Then, we shall present an overview of the proposed modules.
After that, we will go into the details of the WPL and the
GEM. In doing so, we primarily concentrate on the motivation,
detailed network architecture, and advantages of our proposed
modules for small object tracking.
A. Architecture of Siamese Trackers
Finding the optimal target location by minimizing the following objective is the main goal of visual object tracking,
which can be seen as a learning problem:
L(ω) =

m
X
j=1

  X
γjr f x j; ω , yj +
λk ∥ωk ∥2

(1)

k

where f (x j ; ω) is the prediction at each position and y is the
annotated label, so r is the residual; ω, γ , λ is the filter, impact
factor, and regularization, respectively.
The earlier Siamese tracker, SiamFC [42], takes (1) as a
matching issue, which transforms the tracking into locating
the target z from search regions x by computing the highest visual similarity. SiamFC consists of a template branch,
a search branch and cross correlation. These two branches
collect template features φ(z) and search features φ(x) via
the backbone φ(·), respectively. Then, the cross correlation
(convolution) is applied to these semantic features to obtain
the similarity responses f (z, x), which is formulated as
f (z, x) = f (φ(z), φ(x)) = φ(z) ∗ φ(x) + b · I

(2)

where ∗ is the cross correlation, b is the offset of the similarity
value, and I is the identity matrix. Then, the peak of f (z, x)
corresponds to the target location in the search region.
Later, SiamRPN [43] combined SiamFC and a region
proposal network (RPN) to obtain performance gains from
high-precision regression thus becoming the mainstream
framework for Siamese trackers. To avoid multiscale estimation, SiamRPN performs classification and regression (location

Authorized licensed use limited to: Xi'an Jiaotong-Liverpool University. Downloaded on April 11,2025 at 08:28:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5618815

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 61, 2023

Fig. 2. Pipeline of SmallTrack. It consists of five components, i.e., the WPL for feature downsampling and denoising shown in Fig. 4, backbone for feature
extraction, cross correlation for similarity responses, the GEM for classification response enhancement shown in Fig. 6, and classification and regression for
final prediction. Best viewed in color.

and scale) of targets based on cross correlation, as follows:
(
Scls
w×h×2k = cls_head( f (z, x))
(3)
reg
B w×h×4k = reg_head( f (z, x))
reg

where Scls
w×h×2k and B w×h×4k represent classification responses
and regression responses, respectively, with w × h × 2k
being the width, height, and number of channels.

B. Overview of Proposed Modules
Our approach consists of two key components, namely, the
WPL and the GEM, for noise robustness and classification
discriminability, respectively. First, the WPL constructed by
the discrete wavelet transform (DWT) divides the feature
map into four subbands consisting of low-frequency components and high-frequency components. The low-frequency
components retain the main information of the target, and the
high-frequency components generate global detail descriptors,
which jointly obtain the final weighted feature map. The 2-D
DWT halves the size of the input, so the WPL can not
only play the role of max pooling for lossless downsampling
but also effective anti-aliasing and denoising. Due to weak
features, small objects are more sensitive to aliasing effects
and noise, and the WPL effectively mitigates these impacts.
Second, the GEM represents the classification responses as
a set of nodes and edges. Then, each pixel represents a
node, the relations between neighboring pixels are used as
an edge, and the weight of the edge is the closeness of the
relations. GEM then updates nodes, edges, and the weights of
edges to achieve pixel-level and irregular weight modulation to
refine the representation of small objects on the classification
responses.

C. Robust Learning via WPL
Pooling is achieved by discarding some information for
downsampling, and two popular forms are max pooling and

Fig. 3. Downsampling comparison of average pooling, max pooling, and
2-D DWT. (a) Input. (b) Avg pooling. (c) Max pooling. (d) Wavelet.

average pooling, defined by (4) and (5), respectively,

ai, j = max a Ri, j
Ri, j

ai, j =

1 X
a Ri, j
Ri, j R

(4)
(5)

i, j

where i, j is the position on the feature map and Ri, j is the
pooling region centered on i, j.
However, as shown in Fig. 3, both max pooling and average
pooling suffer from some limitations: they generate aliasing
effects thereby destroying the basic structure of the target
and amplifying random noise [17]. For example, when the
main features have lower values than the unimportant features,
the former are dropped in max pooling. Average pooling
receives features with high values and features with low values,
which dilutes the former [27]. Obviously, popular pooling
operations are not suitable for small object tracking due to
the more background clutter in the UAV view and the weak
feature information of small objects, which causes the pooled
small object feature information to be easily drowned out by
background noise.
Wavelet pooling is considered to be an alternative to the
two popular pooling methods. High-frequency components
are usually discarded as noise in [17], [26], and [27], and
only low-frequency components are utilized to retain the main
information of the objects. However, Wang et al. [44] found
that high-frequency components that contain more information
than sample-specific idiosyncrasies play a significant role
in depicting some objects, especially smaller ones. Hence,
to ensure that the information on small objects is maintained,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Xi'an Jiaotong-Liverpool University. Downloaded on April 11,2025 at 08:28:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XUE et al.: SmallTrack: WAVELET POOLING AND GRAPH ENHANCED CLASSIFICATION

5618815

Fig. 4. Network architecture of WPL. Input X is divided into four subbands
by the 2-D DWT, where HH containing excessive noise information is
discarded.

we further employ DWT for feature extraction and utilize both
low-frequency components and high-frequency components to
characterize targets. Based on [17] and [28], we propose the
WPL to downsample the features, as displayed in Fig. 4,
while the aliasing effect and noise are effectively mitigated.
The DWT decomposes the input image into four discrete
wavelet subbands, and its principle is as follows [45]:


t −b
1 X
ψ
(6)
ψa,b (t) = √
a n
a
where a and b represent scale and translation, respectively;
ψ is the basic wavelet function. Since it is discrete, a = 2 j ,
j ∈ Z and b = 2 j l, l ∈ Z , (6) is equal to


X

t −b
1 X
ψ
ψ 2− j t − l
(7)
ψa,b (t) = √
= 2− j/2
a n
a
n
where the scale a is redefined in terms of a scale factor j, and
the scale becomes coarser as j grows.
Theoretically, the basic wavelet function ψ in Hilbert space
can be divided into two components: the scale function ϕ(),
which corresponds to the original function’s low-frequency
part, and the wavelet function ψ(), corresponding to the highfrequency part. Therefore, the 2-D DWT, which is made
up of the horizontal (u 1 ) and vertical (u 2 ) outputs of the
DWT, contains one scale function ϕ() and three wavelet
functions ψ()

ϕ(u) = ϕ(u 1 )ϕ(u 2 )



 ψ h (u) = ϕ(u )ψ(u )
1
2
(8)
v

ψ
=
ψ(u
(u)
)ϕ(u
1
2)



ψ d (u) = ψ(u 1 )ψ(u 2 )
where u is the 2-D input, h, v, d indicate the sensitivity to
horizontal, vertical, and diagonal edges, and ϕ() and ψ()
represent the low-pass filter and high-pass filter, which are
applied to image approximation and extraction of edge features, respectively.
According to (8), we process images using the 2-D DWT,
indicated in (9) and Fig. 5. First, DWT is performed on
each row of images to obtain the low-frequency component
L and the high-frequency component H in the horizontal
direction, and then DWT is performed on each column of the
transformed data to obtain the low-frequency component LL
in the horizontal and vertical directions, the low-frequency in
the horizontal direction and the high-frequency in the vertical
direction LH, the high-frequency in the horizontal direction

Fig. 5. Decomposition process of the 2-D DWT is performed in the order
of each row and then each column.

and the low-frequency in the vertical direction HL, and the
high-frequency HH in the horizontal and vertical directions
{LL, LH, HL, HH} = 2D DWT(X )

LL = ϕ(X ) = ϕ(x1 )ϕ(x2 )



 LH = ψ LH (X ) = ϕ(x )ψ(x )
1
2
HL

HL = ψ (X ) = ψ(x1 )ϕ(x2 )



HH = ψ HH (X ) = ψ(x1 )ψ(x2 )

(9)

where the input X ∈ RC×H ×W is decomposed into four
discrete wavelet subbands (LL, LH, HL, HH ∈ RC×H/2×W/2 )
and x1 and x2 represent the horizontal and vertical directions,
respectively.
Obviously, LL mainly retains the main structure information
helping to recognize targets, and LH, HL, and HH indicate
the detailed information in the horizontal, vertical, and diagonal directions, respectively. WaveCNet [17] only utilizes the
low-frequency components and discards all the high-frequency
components which contain a rich amount of detailed information. Fusion in the wavelet domain for foreground detection in
camouflaged scenes (FWFC) [29] argues that small differences
in the image domain can be highlighted in certain wavelet
bands, which is beneficial for identifying small objects. Thus,
we choose to further use high-frequency information to modulate low-frequency components. First, LH and HL are added
elementwise, and then the high-frequency weight Whigh is
generated
Whigh = δ(LH + HL), ∈ RC×H/2×W/2

(10)

where δ is the softmax function to normalize the global detail
feature.
Then, Whigh is Hadamard multiplied by low-frequency LL
to obtain the attention matrix Att. The process of constantly
adjusting Att is equivalent to making a trade-off between
selecting and not selecting
Att = Whigh ⊙ LL,

∈ RC×H/2×W/2 .

(11)

By elementwise addition to contacting the input feature X
and attention matrix, we obtain the weighted features Y
Y = Att + LL,

∈ RC×H/2×W/2 .

(12)

The WPL decomposes the input signal into four discrete
wavelet subbands without information loss and embeds the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Xi'an Jiaotong-Liverpool University. Downloaded on April 11,2025 at 08:28:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5618815

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 61, 2023

and the activation value of the node related to the region of
interest is higher
Ṽ = T{cat[V, T(E)]}

Fig. 6. Architecture of GEM consists of a generator and an aggregator.
The generator transforms the input image into the graph, and the aggregator
updates the weights based on the relationship between nodes and edges.

detailed information into the output. Thus, the WPL ensures
that input features X after pooling can be fully preserved
and recovered while also ensuring that small objects are not
affected by aliasing effects and noise.
D. Discriminative Learning via GEM
GNNs are well suited for the processing of graph data
in non-Euclidean spaces with irregular structure objects. The
uncertainty of the real world leads to structural irregularities
of the target being tracked and so GNNs are more capable of
handling variations in scales and aspect ratios in the course of
tracking. In addition, GNNs incorporate the structural features
of graph data into neural networks to exploit potential links
between samples and enhance the understanding of samples.
Thus, based on the global matching manner [46] and inspired
by GAL [47], the proposed GEM focuses on considering the
relationships of objects on the classification responses and
enhancing the responses of small objects to ensure that they
are not overwhelmed by background noise. In brief, GEM can
produce useful graph representations for pixel relations, which
is advantageous for small objects.
As illustrated in Fig. 6, GEM is divided into the generator
and the aggregator. First, the generator represents the input X
as the graph containing nodes and edges
G(V, E) = f (X )
C×H ×W

(13)
C×H ×W

where X ∈ R
is the input, V ∈ R
is the set
of nodes, E ∈ R4×C×H ×W is the edges, and the generator is
denoted by f . Specifically, we take the input X as nodes and
generate edges based on the nodes, where the composition
of edges takes into account only nodes and the four nearest
nodes. Thus, (13) can be further expressed as
V =X

(14)


 

cat V2:H,: , V1,: 



 


 cat V

:,2:W , V:,1


E =V ⊙S

cat VH,: , V1:H −1,: 




 

cat V:,W , V:,1:W −1

(15)

where ⊙ is the Hadamard product and V1:H −1,: and V:,1:W −1
denote the rows from 1 to H − 1 and the columns from 1 to
W − 1 of V , respectively. cat and S represent concatenating
and stacking nodes, respectively.
Based on G(V, E), the aggregator combs and updates the
relations between nodes V and edges E. Then, the nodes V
are updated according to the relations (E) between the nodes,

(16)

where T represents the linear transformation performed by the
fully connected layer and Ṽ ∈ RC/2×H ×W is a set of updated
nodes.
Next, to update the weights of the edges E, GEM repeatedly
stacks nodes and then uses the fully connected layer for linear
transformation to complete the update of the edges
   

 V 


 
  


V

Ẽ = T T S 
(17)


V 







 

V
where the first and second T are used to update edge features
and the dimension reduction operation, respectively. A set of
updated nodes is represented by Ẽ ∈ RC/2×H ×W .
Finally, the updated node and edge features are fused in (18)
to modulate the input X , thereby realizing the redistribution of
weights: higher activation values for the target area and lower
activation values for the background area
 

Y = T cat X, Ẽ ⊙ Ṽ , ∈ RC×H ×W .
(18)
In short, based on graph theory, the GEM has strong knowledge representation and structural features. Its pixel-level
modulation of classification responses can effectively enhance
the ability to distinguish small objects, which will be validated
in our experiments. The full pipeline of our method is detailed
in Algorithm 1.
IV. E XPERIMENTS
A. Implementation Details
Our experiments were implemented using PyTorch 1.2 on
a PC with an Intel Core i7-9700 CPU (3.6 GHz)
and 2 NVIDIA RTX 2080Ti GPUs. Video object detection
dataset (VID) [48], object detection dataset (DET) [48],
GOT-10k [49], YT-BB [50], and COCO [51] datasets were
used for the training of SmallTrack and consisted of 760k
sequences and exceeded more than 10M annotated images.
Each group of data fed to the model came from two different
frames in annotated sequences that contain the same target,
helping the model learn the movement of the target. The
127 × 127 template image slided on the 255 × 255 search
images with a sliding stride of 8.
Parameter Settings: ResNet50 [52] was chosen as the
backbone.
the WPL was Haar with
√The wavelet
√ in √
√
{1/ 2, 1/ 2} and {1/ 2, −1/ 2} used as the low-pass filter
ϕ() and high-pass filter ψ(), respectively. Stochastic gradient
descent (SGD) was adopted as the optimizer with a momentum of 0.9, where the batch size was 20 pairs. A total of
1 000 000 pairs of samples were trained in each epoch, and
the whole training lasted 20 epochs. We used a warm-up
learning rate of 1 × 10−3 for the first five epochs, which
decayed exponentially from 5 × 10−3 to 5 × 10−5 with a
momentum of 0.9 for the last 15 epochs. In the first ten
epochs, the pretrained ResNet-50 was frozen, and the last

Authorized licensed use limited to: Xi'an Jiaotong-Liverpool University. Downloaded on April 11,2025 at 08:28:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XUE et al.: SmallTrack: WAVELET POOLING AND GRAPH ENHANCED CLASSIFICATION

Algorithm 1 Tracking Algorithm
Input: Video frames f 1 , f 2 , . . . , f t , . . . f L of length L;
Initial target state s1 ;
Output: Target state st in subsequent frames;
If t = 1 then (Template branch)
Obtain the template region z in f 1 based on the
initial target state s1 ;
z_crop : 127 × 127 × 3 ← cropped(z);
z_half : 63 × 63 × 3 ← WPL(z_crop) using Eq.
(9)-(12);
z ′ : 7 × 7 × 256 ← φ(z_hal f );
Else (Search branch)
Obtain the search region x t in f t based on the
previous predicted target state st−1 ;
x_crop : 255 × 255 × 3 ← cropped(x t );
x_half : 127 × 127 × 3 ← WPL(x_crop) using Eq.
(9)-(12);
x ′ : 31 × 31 × 256 ← φ(x_half );
//Track

Reg_scores : 25 × 25 × 4 ← depth-Xcorr x ′ , z ′ ;
Cls_scores : 25 × 25 × 2 ← depth-Xcorr x ′ , z ′ ;
G-Cls_scores : 25 × 25 × 2 ← GEM(Cls_scor es)
using Eq. (14)-(18);
Obtain Max-score based on G-Cls_scores;
Current target state st ← using Max-score and
Reg_scores;
End if

ten epochs fine-tuned the conv2, conv3, and conv4 layers.
The cross-entropy loss and intersection over union (IoU) loss
were employed to optimize the classification and regression,
respectively.
B. Datasets and Evaluation Metric
Experiments and comparisons adopted sequences from four
well-known UAV benchmarks: UAV20L [53], UAVDT [54],
DTB70 [55], and VisDrone2019-SOT [56] to verify the effectiveness of SmallTrack. Small objects, similar objects, background clutter, and scale variations frequently occur during the
tracking process of UAVs, which makes tracking challenging.
In addition, our tracker was evaluated on LaTOT [22], the
dataset specifically designed for small objects, to verify the
ability to track small objects. We note that the trackers’ results
in this article were provided from the dataset officially, from
the authors, and from the survey [57], [58].
UAV20L is an aerial video dataset obtained from UAVs
and a high-fidelity visual tracking simulator. Specifically,
it contains 20 videos and more than 58k frames in total with
12 diverse kinds of attributes. In addition, sequences captured
by UAVs have the characteristics of complex backgrounds
and large-scale variations, putting forward higher requirements
for object-tracking algorithms. In addition, the length of the
sequences (2934 frames per sequence on average) is longer
than that of other datasets, which verifies the long-term aerial
tracking ability.
UAVDT is a large-scale and challenging UAV detection
and tracking benchmark and it mainly focuses on vehicles.

5618815

It consists of 50 sequences captured with UAV platforms
from complex scenarios, and 80 000 frames are annotated
over 2700 vehicles with 0.84 million bounding boxes. It contains 14 challenging attributes, such as weather changes,
flight altitude, vehicle category, and occlusion. The targets
show the characteristics of small size, dense distribution, and
fast motion, which strongly tests the overall performance of
algorithms.
DTB70 consists of 70 videos captured by UAV in outdoor
scenes and manually labeled with bounding boxes in all
frames. It covers 11 challenging attributes and short-term
and long-term aerial targets. Moreover, considering that UAV
flight motion typically has a higher degree of freedom than
many traditional tracking platforms, DTB70 primarily focuses
on tracking people and cars with specially designed camera
motion. Thus, it presents an adequate evaluation of the robustness of the tracker in fast-motion scenes.
VisDrone2019-SOT consists of 288 video clips formed
by 261 908 frames and 10 209 static images captured by
various UAV-mounted cameras, covering a wide range of
aspects, including long-term tracking and crowded scenes.
These frames are manually annotated with more than 2.6 million bounding boxes. In this article, the test-dev part of
VisDrone2019-SOT was used as the test set, consisting of
35 sequences and 12 visual attributes.
LaTOT consists of 434 video sequences with a total
real-world frame of more than 217k and an average frame
of 501. LaTOT collects 48 categories for small objects from
270 scenes, facilitating the evaluation of various algorithms
in the real world. It contains 12 major attributes that are
challenging for current trackers to track.
Tracking performance is based on one-pass evaluation
(OPE) [59], i.e., success rate and precision rate. The percentage of frames whose IoU is higher than a set threshold
(usually 0.5) is the success rate, and the success plot’s area
under the curve (AUC) is utilized for ranking. Furthermore, the
center location error (CLE) between the estimated bounding
box and the ground-truth bounding box is used to measure
precision. The precision plot displays the ratio of scenarios
where the difference between the estimated bounding box and
the ground-truth box is less than various thresholds, and the
result at 20 pixels is typically used for ranking.
C. Evaluation of UAV Datasets and Small Object Dataset
In this section, we will report the tracking results of our
SmallTrack and other dominant trackers on UAV20L, UAVDT,
DTB70, VisDrone2019-SOT, and LaTOT, respectively.
1) Results on UAV20L: To fully demonstrate the overall
performance of our tracker, SmallTrack was compared with
the current leading ten trackers, including DeepMTA [60],
HiFT [6], AutoTrack [13], GlobalTrack [61], SiamBAN [62],
SiamRPN++ [46], ARCF [12], SiamFC++ [63], SiamAPN [7], and SiamAPN++ [9], where ARCF, HiFT, AutoTrack, SiamAPN, and SiamAPN++ were specially designed
for UAVs. As shown in Table I, SmallTrack shows superior
performance compared with other leading trackers. SmallTrack
ranks first in both the success rate (60.0%) and the precision
rate (79.7%), and exceeds the performance of the previous

Authorized licensed use limited to: Xi'an Jiaotong-Liverpool University. Downloaded on April 11,2025 at 08:28:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5618815

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 61, 2023

TABLE I
E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS ON UAV20L. T HE B EST T HREE P ERFORMANCE ARE D ISPLAYED IN R ED , G REEN , AND B LUE , R ESPECTIVELY. S UC .
AND P RE . M EAN S UCCESS R ATE AND P RECISION R ATE . S MALLT RACK R ANKS F IRST P LACE IN T ERMS OF B OTH P RECISION AND
S UCCESS R ATE A MONG 11 T RACKERS , AND RUNS AT H IGH S PEED

Fig. 7. Results on UAVDT. The AUC of the success rate and the precision
at the threshold of 20 pixels are given in brackets to rank the trackers. Ours
SmallTrack (shown in bold) obtains the best success rate and second-best
precision rate. (a) Success rate. (b) Precision rate.

Fig. 8. Results on DTB70. The AUC of the success rate and the precision at
the threshold of 20 pixels are given in brackets to rank the trackers. SmallTrack
(shown in bold) ranks in first place in terms of both precision and success
rate. (a) Success rate. (b) Precision rate.

top tracker SiamBAN by 3.4% and 4.2% and HiFT by 6.0%
and 4.5%. This can be attributed to two major reasons. First,
the WPL improves the anti-aliasing effect and noise robustness thereby completely retaining the information of small
objects. Next, the distraction in classification is alleviated
by GEM, which makes small objects highly distinguishable.
Similarly, our tracker is more powerful than DeepMTA in
enhancing target perception due to the graph-constructed
GEM. In addition, GlobalTrack is a long-term tracker based
on global detection, but its performance is not outstanding
due to the weak representation of target features. Compared
with other UAV trackers such as AutoTrack, SiamAPN, and
SiamAPN++, SmallTrack achieves favorable performance in
terms of success rate, precision rate, and speed and thus strikes
the balance between accuracy and speed.
2) Results on UAVDT: As displayed in Fig. 7, SmallTrack
was compared with 17 advanced trackers, including SiamCAR [64], SiamBAN [62], SiamRPN++ [46], MobileTrack [65], SiamRPN [43], MDNet [66], ARCF [12],
AutoTrack [13], ECO-gpu [67], ADNet [68], TADT [69],
DiMP50 [70], Super-DiMP [70], PrDiMP50 [71], TrDiMP [72], TrSiam [72], and TransT [73], where AutoTrack,
ARCF, and MobileTrack are trackers for UAVs. It is clear that
SmallTrack has competitive advantages benefiting from the
WPL and GEM, achieving a success rate of 63.7% and a precision rate of 86.6%. Compared to the other 17 trackers, SmallTrack ranks first in success rate and second in precision rate
which is slightly inferior to the transformer tracker TrSiam.
In terms of success rate, SmallTrack achieves a performance
comparable to or even surpassing that of the transformer
trackers (TransT TrDiMP and TrSiam) and outperforms the
online update trackers DiMP50, Super-DiMP, and PrDiMP50
by 6.2%, 4.4%, and 5.1%, respectively. The precision rate of
SmallTrack is also ahead of TransT, DiMP50, Super-DiMP,
and PrDiMP50 by a certain margin. Moreover, UAV trackers

such as ARCF and AutoTrack perform poorly in comparison
to SmallTrack, and find it difficult to steadily track targets from
the aerial view. Compared with other trackers, SmallTrack
also achieves outstanding performance, showing its reliable
ability in the face of complex challenges.
3) Results on DTB70: We utilized deep trackers (SiamBAN [62], MobileTrack [65], SiamRPN++ [46], HiFT [6],
SiamRPN [43], ECO-gpu [67], DiMP50 [70], SuperDiMP [70], PrDiMP50 [71], TrDiMP [72], TrSiam [72],
TransT [73], C-COT [74], and TCTrack [16]) and correlation
filter trackers (AutoTrack [13], ARCF [12], and TADT [69])
to cover the mainstream trackers. As we can see from Fig. 8,
SmallTrack shows compelling performance compared with
other competitive trackers. It obtains the best success rate
(65.4%) and the highest precision rate (85.8%). For the
second-best tracker TrSiam, SmallTrack outperforms it by
0.9% in the success rate and 1.9% in the precision rate.
As seen from the comparison, our tracker maintains superior
robustness and outperforms other leading trackers which fully
demonstrates the effectiveness of the proposed WPL and
GEM.
4) Results on VisDrone2019-SOT-test-dev: Here, SiamRPN++ [46], SiamAPN [7], ARCF [12], ECO-HC [67],
SiamBAN [62], AutoTrack [13], SiamAPN++ [9], SiamRPN [43], DiMP50 [70], Super-DiMP [70], PrDiMP50 [71],
TrDiMP [72], TrSiam [72], TransT [73], SiamGAT [19],
SiamFC++ [63], and LightTrack [75] were employed to compare performance with SmallTrack. As Fig. 9 illustrates, our
tracker SmallTrack is comparable to TrDiMP and Super-DiMP
in terms of success rate and improves by 4.9% and 6.8%
over SiamRPN++ and SiamAPN, respectively. Furthermore,
our approach outperforms the leading trackers SiamAPN and
DiMP50 by 4.2% and 4.3% in the precision rate, respectively.
We note that the performance of SiamBAN, which performs
well on other datasets, is not satisfactory here, while the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Xi'an Jiaotong-Liverpool University. Downloaded on April 11,2025 at 08:28:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XUE et al.: SmallTrack: WAVELET POOLING AND GRAPH ENHANCED CLASSIFICATION

Fig. 9. Results on VisDrone2019-SOT-test-dev. The AUC of the success rate
and the precision at the threshold of 20 pixels are given in brackets to rank
the trackers. SmallTrack (shown in bold) obtains the fifth-best success rate
and the third-best precision rate. (a) Success rate. (b) Precision rate.

performance of SmallTrack remains first, indicating that it can
effectively deal with a variety of scenes.
5) Results on LaTOT: LaTOT collects 48 categories for
small objects from 270 scenes, which makes it a very
challenging benchmark. To further evaluate the performance of the proposed tracker in small object tracking,
we compared SmallTrack with other powerful trackers
(SiamRPN++ [46], SiamFC++ [63], DaSiamRPN [76],
SiamBAN [62], SiamRPN [43], SiamMask [77], D3S [78],
SiamR-CNN [79], Ocean [80], GlobalTrack [61], pyVital [81], Meta-Tracker [82], py-MDNet [66], SiamDW [83],
and RT-MDNet [84]) on the LaTOT testing set with
165 sequences and 112 780 frames. LaTOT sets the precision threshold to 5 pixels, which is more reasonable for
small objects. From Fig. 10, we can observe that our tracker
outperforms others by achieving a success rate of 27.1%,
a normalized precision rate of 33.9%, and a precision rate
of 43.8%. Note that even in the dataset for non-UAV scenes,
our tracker demonstrates leading performance owing to robust
small object characterization and discrimination. Our tracker’s
performance is slightly lower than that of SiamRPN++ and
SiamFC++ in normalized precision. We believe that it is
influenced by the threshold of 20 pixels for the normalized
precision rate, which differs from the threshold of 5 pixels
for the precision rate. Larger thresholds mean lower metrics
to evaluate successful tracking, which is not reasonable for
small objects with few pixels. The unsatisfactory performance
of common trackers proves that small object tracking is indeed
a challenging task, and the results also fully validate the
effectiveness of our tracker to track small objects.
6) Attribute-Based Performance: As illustrated in Table II,
SmallTrack was compared with other trackers on UAV20L
with various attributes, where full occlusion, viewpoint
change, similar objects, scale variations, fast motion, illumination variations, and low resolution were the common
attributes in UAV scenes. The results indicate that SmallTrack
embedded with the WPL and GEM performs stronger in the
above attributes. Moreover, SmallTrack is comparable with
SiamBAN and exceeds other trackers with a huge improvement in similar objects, showing reliable discrimination ability.
D. Qualitative Evaluation
To intuitively show the performance of our tracker, we quantitatively compared SmallTrack with the trackers mentioned
above. Fig. 11 presents three evaluations of the typical UAV

5618815

scenes from UAV20L. The IoU between the ground-truth and
the predicted bounding box reflects the performance of the
trackers. The main challenges in these sequences are fast
motion, small objects, low resolution (the first row), background clutter, partial occlusion, scale variation (the second
row), viewpoint change, and out of view (the third row).
From frames 500 and 816 of sequence car9, we can see that
the results of SmallTrack are more accurate than those of
HiFT, and occlusions and low resolution also fail to affect
the discrimination of our tracker. After 99 frames of sequence
group2, HiFT is affected by occlusions and starts to lose the
target, and the predicted result is meaningless. When the target
reappears at frame 1325, HiFT is unable to adjust in time
and keeps the lost state to the end. However, SmallTrack is a
reliable and timely tracker for finding the reappearing target
due to its powerful discrimination capabilities. Viewpoint
change and out of view in sequence person7 are unique and
common challenges in UAV scenes. We can observe from
the IoU curves that HiFT is easily thrown off by the sharp
turn target, leading to subsequent tracking failure. In contrast,
SmallTrack is able to steadily track the target in the face of
viewpoint change and out of view, exhibiting its outstanding
classification and forceful tracking ability. Therefore, SmallTrack is more competent at aerial object tracking than other
trackers.
In addition, we further selected three sequences in DTB70
to demonstrate the effectiveness of our tracker, including
Animal3, SnowBoarding4, and StreetBasketball3. As seen
in Fig. 1, SmallTrack performs robustly against challenging
scenes, including small objects, occlusions, similar objects,
fast motions, and background clutter. For example, there are
low-resolution and similar targets in the sequence Animal3,
and only SmallTrack can stably and precisely track the small
target, realizing stronger performance than PrDiMP50 and
TransT. In comparison, other trackers either lose the target
(TransT, DiMP50, and PrDiMP50) or predict an inappropriate bounding box (HiFT and TCTrack). The results in
SnowBoarding4 display that most trackers are affected by
blurring target features, but SmallTrack still accurately and
adaptively locates small objects in the face of scale variations
and weak appearance information. In addition, in the sequence
StreetBasketball3, the targets being tracked are frequently
occluded by similar targets, which heavily affects the tracking
performance of many trackers, including DiMP50, PrDiMP50,
and HiFT. In contrast, SmallTrack can robustly identify the
target thus exhibiting its trustworthiness classification ability.
Due to its reliable performance in a variety of complex scenes,
SmallTrack is more competent at aerial object-tracking tasks.
E. Analysis of the WPL
To better understand our proposed WPL, we visualize the
feature maps when the WPL is applied or not. The main part
is divided into three parts to explore the functions of WPL.
1) Analysis of High-Frequency Components: As shown
in Fig. 13, WPL achieves better performance on several UAV
tracking benchmarks. Wavelet pooling based on low-frequency
components only roughly preserves the information of targets.
However, for tracking small objects that occupy few pixels,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Xi'an Jiaotong-Liverpool University. Downloaded on April 11,2025 at 08:28:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5618815

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 61, 2023

Fig. 10. Results on the LaTOT Testing set. The AUC of the success rate and the precision at the threshold of 5 pixels are given in brackets to rank the
trackers. Compared to the other 15 trackers, SmallTrack ranks second in the success rate and third in the precision rate. (a) Success rate. (b) Normalized
precision rate. (c) Precision rate.
TABLE II
ATTRIBUTE -BASED E VALUATION OF THE S MALLT RACK AND OTHER T EN T RACKERS ON UAV20L B ENCHMARK . T HE B EST T HREE P ERFORMANCE A RE
D ISPLAYED IN R ED , G REEN , AND B LUE , R ESPECTIVELY. S UC . AND P RE . M EAN S UCCESS R ATE AND P RECISION R ATE . A MONG THE S EVEN
ATTRIBUTES , THE P ROPOSED S MALLT RACK T RACKER R ANKS F IRST IN S IX ATTRIBUTES , W HILE ACHIEVING THE S ECOND -B EST IN THE
R EMAINING L OW R ESOLUTION C ATEGORY. T HE C ONSISTENT O UTSTANDING P ERFORMANCE OF S MALLT RACK U NDER D IFFERENT
T RACKING C ONDITIONS V ERIFIES I TS ROBUSTNESS

Fig. 11. IoU curves on three representative sequences. IoU indicates the quality of the tracking. Compared to the UAV tracker HiFT, SmallTrack can track
small objects more accurately. (a) Sequence car9. (b) Sequence group2. (c) Sequence person7.

the lack of detailed information can cause performance degradation. Therefore, WPL characterizes the target using both
high-frequency components and low-frequency components,
effectively boosting the performance. This also indicates that
the detailed information carried by the high-frequency components plays a significant role in depicting objects, especially
smaller objects.
2) Analysis of Noise Robustness: Fig. 12 shows feature
maps after downsampling by max pooling and WPL with clean
and noisy images as input. The feature maps obtained by
WPL offer clearer backgrounds than those obtained without

WPL, and the former’s object structures are more complete
than those of the latter. As the image passes through layers in
the CNNs, the noise may become more noticeable. Whether
or not the noise is recognizable by humans, the CNNs output
can be significantly changed when the input image is poisoned
by noise. In the experiments, the results of max pooling also
illustrate the above point. By comparison, our WPL suppresses
noise very well, regardless of the type of noise, reflecting its
noise robustness. In addition, targets, especially small targets,
are more distinguishable in the feature maps sampled by WPL
than in the feature maps sampled by max pooling which

Authorized licensed use limited to: Xi'an Jiaotong-Liverpool University. Downloaded on April 11,2025 at 08:28:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XUE et al.: SmallTrack: WAVELET POOLING AND GRAPH ENHANCED CLASSIFICATION

5618815

Fig. 12. Visualization of the denoising effect. The feature maps are sourced from clean and noisy images. In each subfigure, the first column shows the
clean example image and its two noisy versions corrupted by Gaussian noise and impulse noise. The second column shows their feature maps generated by
max pooling, while the third column shows the feature maps produced by WPL using wavelet “Haar.” Obviously, WPL can suppress the noise and maintain
the object structure in the information flow.

Fig. 13. Tracking performance on several benchmarks using wavelet pooling
with low-frequency components (LL) and using WPL.

shows that denoising also plays a positive role in improving
discrimination.
3) Analysis of the Anti-Aliasing Effect: Fig. 14 visualizes
the feature maps after downsampling under max pooling and
WPL. It clearly shows that popular downsampling operations
can lead to an aliasing effect, which would accumulate noise
and destroy the fundamental object structures. On the other
hand, WPL in SmallTrack eliminates these drawbacks. In our
opinion, this explains why SmallTrack performs more reliably
at tracking small objects.
F. Analysis of the GEM
The classification responses without or with GEM embedded are shown in Fig. 15. It is clear that without GEM to learn

Fig. 14. Visualization of the anti-aliasing effect. The aliasing effect is caused
by the feature map downsampled by max pooling (w/o WPL), and the target
structure is corrupted. The WPL fully preserves the detailed information of
the target.

discriminative features, the classification responses become
unfocused and much easier to shift to distractors, while target
responses are higher than the background response on the
GEM-enhanced classification responses. The reason for this
is that GEM is based on graph theory for pixel-level modulation of classification responses. Therefore, GEM prevents
the tracker from being distracted by challenges such as weak
appearances, similar targets, fast motion, and background
clutter by making the target more distinct and improving

Authorized licensed use limited to: Xi'an Jiaotong-Liverpool University. Downloaded on April 11,2025 at 08:28:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5618815

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 61, 2023

TABLE III
A BLATION E XPERIMENTS OF S MALLT RACK . S UC ., P RE ., AND N.P RE . M EAN S UCCESS R ATE , P RECISION R ATE , AND N ORMALIZED P RECISION R ATE ,
R ESPECTIVELY. T HE B EST P ERFORMANCE A RE D ISPLAYED IN Bold. T HE E FFECTIVENESS OF THE T WO P ROPOSED M ODULES IS V ERIFIED BY
THE P ERFORMANCE C HANGE R ELATIVE TO THE BASELINE S IAM BAN T RACKER . T HE C OMPLETE S MALLT RACK T RACKER C OMBINES
T HEIR B ENEFITS TO M AXIMIZE THE P ERFORMANCE

the discrimination between background and target features,
improving the classification ability.
G. Ablation Experiments

Fig. 15. Classification responses without or with GEM. The targets are
marked by red boxes in the input image. GEM obtains more reliable responses
in the face of similar objects and fast motion.

Fig. 16. Top-500 features visualization by t-SNE. Gold and purple indicate
the background and target features, respectively. GEM effectively narrows
the intraclass distances and enlarges the interclass distances. (a) w/o GEM.
(b) w/ GEM.

To verify the effectiveness of our framework, comprehensive ablation studies are presented in this section. Ablation
experiments were implemented on UAV20L, UAVDT, DTB70,
LaTOT testing set, and VisDrone2019-SOT-test-dev to evaluate the contribution of different components to our SmallTrack.
Table III demonstrates the success rate (Suc.), normalized
precision rate (N.Pre.), and precision rate (Pre.) of different
variations. We note that the baseline represents the SiamBAN
training with the same datasets as SmallTrack.
From the comparison of the first two rows, GEM has the
potential to enhance classification ability in UAV platforms,
promoting the success and precision of 56.4% and 73.1% on
UAV20L, 63.2% and 85.1% on UAVDT, 64.6% and 85.1%
on DTB70, 60.7% and 83.4% on VisDrone2019-SOT-test-dev,
and 25.6% and 43.1% on LaTOT, respectively. It shows that
SmallTrack benefits from the enhanced classification responses
provided by the GEM. Despite improvements, it is still difficult
to cope with information loss during downsampling. Thus,
we replace the original max pooling with WPL, which brings
the success rates increases (6.4%, 0.8%, 1.2%, 3.0%, and
5.0% on UAV20L, UAVDT, DTB70, VisDrone2019-SOT-testdev, and LaTOT, respectively), and the precision rates are
promoted to 79.7%, 86.6%, 85.8%, 84.9%, and 43.8%. This
means the WPL effectively suppresses noise and aliasing
effects to avoid noise accumulation and damage to small
object structures. The results verify that each component of
SmallTrack helps boosts performance without introducing the
notable computation burden.
H. Real-World Tests

discrimination capability. In general, SmallTrack achieves
trustworthy performance with the help of GEM, filtering
classification responses and guiding the accurate classification
of targets being tracked.
Furthermore, Fig. 16 displays the t-SNE [85] visualizations of the top-500 features sampled from max pooling
and WPL. Here, we can see that features sampled by max
pooling obtain a distinct discrepancy and that cluster results
of the GEM-processed features display a coincidence in distribution. Thus, we believe that our GEM indeed improves

SmallTrack was also implemented on an embedded platform, namely, NVIDIA Jetson TX2, to test its practicability
in real-world applications. Fig. 17 presents three test results
in the wild including cars, motorcycles, and people, and these
sequences were taken at altitudes of 120–200 m. As shown
in Fig. 17, low resolution, out of view and small size
in Sequence 1, background clutters and similar targets in
Sequence 2 and full occlusions and similar targets in Sequence
3 fail to affect the performance of SmallTrack. Moreover,
SmallTrack remains at an average speed of 2.7 frames/s

Authorized licensed use limited to: Xi'an Jiaotong-Liverpool University. Downloaded on April 11,2025 at 08:28:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XUE et al.: SmallTrack: WAVELET POOLING AND GRAPH ENHANCED CLASSIFICATION

5618815

prevent destroying the structure and detailed information of
small objects. Next, GNN-based GEM is employed to build
useful graph representations between nodes and update edges
according to importance, which enlarges the responses of the
small object areas and reduces the responses of the background areas. Therefore, SmallTrack with GEM embedded
can purify similarity response maps and guide more accurate
classification. During the experimental stage, we compared
SmallTrack with several state-of-the-art trackers on five benchmarks, including UAV20L, UAVDT, DTB70, VisDrone2019,
and LaTOT. The results prove the superiority and effectiveness
of SmallTrack compared with these advanced methods while
maintaining a high speed (∼72.5 frames/s). Thus, SmallTrack
is capable of small object tracking tasks for UAVs.
Fig. 17.
Real-world tests. (a) Sequence 1 (frame 498, 572, and 587).
(b) Sequence 2 (frame 117, 328, and 346). (c) Sequence 3 (frame 2, 95,
and 145).

Fig. 18. Failure cases on two challenging sequences (Soccer2 and RaceCar1) from DTB70. Note that most trackers (including SmallTrack) show
performance degradation when the target is occluded.

without using any acceleration techniques such as TensorRT
or model compression. Therefore, the real-world tests on the
embedded system directly validate the robust performance and
efficiency of SmallTrack under various challenges arising in
UAV tracking.
I. Limitations and Future Work
Although our tracker is competitive with top-performance
trackers, it performs poorly in the case of occlusion and out-ofview, which are still open challenges for the tracking community. As shown in Fig. 18, we visualize failure cases from two
typical sequences (Soccer2 and RaceCar1) of DTB70. Similar
to most existing trackers (DiMP50, PrDiMP50, and HiFT), the
performance of SmallTrack degrades when the target being
tracked is occluded. In future work, we will consider global
search strategies and trajectory prediction to improve tracking.
V. C ONCLUSION
In this work, a simple yet efficient Siamese tracker, referred
to as SmallTrack, is proposed for accurate small object
tracking, which improves performance in two stages. First,
we introduce the WPL in the backbone network as an alternative to max pooling that produces aliasing effects. The
WPL can complete the downsampling by the 2-D DWT
thereby avoiding the aliasing effect. Moreover, the feature
maps obtained from WPL are also robust to noise. Therefore,
the WPL adaptively suppresses noise and aliasing effects to

R EFERENCES
[1] M. Karaduman, A. Çınar, and H. Eren, “UAV traffic patrolling via road
detection and tracking in anonymous aerial video frames,” J. Intell.
Robot. Syst., vol. 95, no. 2, pp. 675–690, Aug. 2019.
[2] A. Tsoukalas, D. Xing, N. Evangeliou, N. Giakoumidis, and A. Tzes,
“Deep learning assisted visual tracking of evader-UAV,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Unmanned Aircr. Syst. (ICUAS), Jun. 2021, pp. 252–257.
[3] Y. Cao, H. Ji, W. Zhang, and S. Shirani, “Feature aggregation networks
based on dual attention capsules for visual object tracking,” IEEE Trans.
Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 674–689, Feb. 2022.
[4] S. Yang, J. Xu, H. Chen, and M. Wang, “High-performance UAVs
visual tracking using deep convolutional feature,” Neural Comput. Appl.,
vol. 34, no. 16, pp. 13539–13558, Aug. 2022.
[5] S. Yang, H. Chen, F. Xu, Y. Li, and J. Yuan, “High-performance UAVs
visual tracking based on Siamese network,” Vis. Comput., vol. 38, no. 6,
pp. 2107–2123, Jun. 2022.
[6] Z. Cao, C. Fu, J. Ye, B. Li, and Y. Li, “HiFT: Hierarchical feature
transformer for aerial tracking,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput.
Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2021, pp. 15437–15446.
[7] C. Fu, Z. Cao, Y. Li, J. Ye, and C. Feng, “Onboard real-time aerial
tracking with efficient Siamese anchor proposal network,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5606913.
[8] S. M. Marvasti-Zadeh J. Khaghani, H. Ghanei-Yakhdan, S. Kasaei,
and Li Cheng, “COMET: Context-aware IoU-guided network for small
object tracking,” in Proc. Asian Conf. Comput. Vis., 2020, pp. 1–12.
[9] Z. Cao, C. Fu, J. Ye, B. Li, and Y. Li, “SiamAPN++: Siamese attentional
aggregation network for real-time UAV tracking,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS), Sep. 2021, pp. 3086–3092.
[10] N. Wang, J. Shi, D.-Y. Yeung, and J. Jia, “Understanding and diagnosing
visual tracking systems,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV),
Dec. 2015, pp. 3101–3109.
[11] Y. Li, C. Fu, Z. Huang, Y. Zhang, and J. Pan, “Keyfilter-aware real-time
UAV object tracking,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. (ICRA),
May 2020, pp. 193–199.
[12] Z. Huang, C. Fu, Y. Li, F. Lin, and P. Lu, “Learning aberrance repressed
correlation filters for real-time UAV tracking,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int.
Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019, pp. 2891–2900.
[13] Y. Li, C. Fu, F. Ding, Z. Huang, and G. Lu, “AutoTrack: Towards highperformance visual tracking for UAV with automatic spatio-temporal
regularization,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 11920–11929.
[14] C. Fu, Z. Huang, Y. Li, R. Duan, and P. Lu, “Boundary effect-aware
visual tracking for UAV with online enhanced background learning and
multi-frame consensus verification,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst. (IROS), Nov. 2019, pp. 4415–4422.
[15] F. Li, C. Fu, F. Lin, Y. Li, and P. Lu, “Training-set distillation for realtime UAV object tracking,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom.
(ICRA), May 2020, pp. 9715–9721.
[16] Z. Cao, Z. Huang, L. Pan, S. Zhang, Z. Liu, and C. Fu, “TCTrack: Temporal contexts for aerial tracking,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 14778–14788.
[17] Q. Li, L. Shen, S. Guo, and Z. Lai, “WaveCNet: Wavelet integrated
CNNs to suppress aliasing effect for noise-robust image classification,”
IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 30, pp. 7074–7089, 2021.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Xi'an Jiaotong-Liverpool University. Downloaded on April 11,2025 at 08:28:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5618815

[18] P. W. Battaglia et al., “Relational inductive biases, deep learning, and
graph networks,” 2018, arXiv:1806.01261.
[19] D. Guo, Y. Shao, Y. Cui, Z. Wang, L. Zhang, and C. Shen, “Graph
attention tracking,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021, pp. 9538–9547.
[20] K. Han, Y. Wang, J. Guo, Y. Tang, and E. Wu, “Vision GNN: An image
is worth graph of nodes,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 35,
2022, pp. 8291–8303.
[21] S. M. Marvasti-Zadeh, L. Cheng, H. Ghanei-Yakhdan, and S. Kasaei,
“Deep learning for visual tracking: A comprehensive survey,” 2019,
arXiv:1912.00535.
[22] Y. Zhu et al., “Tiny object tracking: A large-scale dataset and a baseline,”
IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., early access, Feb. 2, 2023, doi:
10.1109/TNNLS.2023.3239529.
[23] Y. Zheng, B. Zhong, Q. Liang, Z. Tang, R. Ji, and X. Li, “Leveraging
local and global cues for visual tracking via parallel interaction network,”
IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 33, no. 4, pp. 1671–1683,
Apr. 2023.
[24] S. G. Mallat, “A theory for multiresolution signal decomposition:
The wavelet representation,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.,
vol. 11, no. 7, pp. 674–693, Jul. 1989.
[25] I. Daubechies and C. Heil, “Ten lectures on wavelets,” Comput. Phys.,
vol. 6, no. 6, p. 697, Nov. 1992.
[26] A. Ferrà, E. Aguilar, and P. Radeva, “Multiple wavelet pooling for
CNNs,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV) Workshops, 2018,
pp. 671–675.
[27] T. Williams and R. Li, “Wavelet pooling for convolutional neural
networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2018, pp. 1–12.
[28] X. Zhao, P. Huang, and X. Shu, “Wavelet-attention CNN for image
classification,” Multimedia Syst., vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 915–924, Jun. 2022.
[29] S. Li, D. Florencio, W. Li, Y. Zhao, and C. Cook, “A fusion framework
for camouflaged moving foreground detection in the wavelet domain,”
IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 27, no. 8, pp. 3918–3930, Aug. 2018.
[30] S. Xue, W. Qiu, F. Liu, and X. Jin, “Wavelet-based residual attention network for image super-resolution,” Neurocomputing, vol. 382,
pp. 116–126, Mar. 2020.
[31] B.-S. Wang, J.-W. Hsieh, M.-C. Chang, P.-Y. Chen, L. Ke, and S. Lyu,
“Learnable discrete wavelet pooling (LDW-pooling) for convolutional
networks,” 2021, arXiv:2109.06638.
[32] P. Liu, H. Zhang, K. Zhang, L. Lin, and W. Zuo, “Multi-level waveletCNN for image restoration,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit. Workshops (CVPRW), Jun. 2018, pp. 1–12.
[33] M. Jia, C. Zhang, Z. Zhao, and L. Wang, “Synthetic aperture radar
image change detection based on convolutional-curvelet neural network
and partial graph-cut,” Electron. Lett., vol. 57, no. 23, pp. 876–878,
Nov. 2021.
[34] Y. Duan, F. Liu, L. Jiao, P. Zhao, and L. Zhang, “SAR image segmentation based on convolutional-wavelet neural network and Markov random
field,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 64, pp. 255–267, Apr. 2017.
[35] F. Gao, X. Wang, Y. Gao, J. Dong, and S. Wang, “Sea ice change
detection in SAR images based on convolutional-wavelet neural networks,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 16, no. 8, pp. 1240–1244,
Aug. 2019.
[36] N. Cvejic et al., “The effect of pixel-level fusion on object tracking
in multi-sensor surveillance video,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2007, pp. 1–7.
[37] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classification with graph
convolutional networks,” 2016, arXiv:1609.02907.
[38] Q. Liu, Q. Chu, B. Liu, and N. Yu, “GSM: Graph similarity model
for multi-object tracking,” in Proc. 29th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell.,
Jul. 2020, pp. 530–536.
[39] C. Shan et al., “Tracklets predicting based adaptive graph tracking,”
2020, arXiv:2010.09015.
[40] Y. Wang, K. Kitani, and X. Weng, “Joint object detection and multiobject tracking with graph neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robot. Automat. (ICRA), Oct. 2021, pp. 13708–13715.
[41] J. Gao, T. Zhang, and C. Xu, “Graph convolutional tracking,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2019,
pp. 4644–4654.
[42] L. Bertinetto, J. Valmadre, J. F. Henriques, A. Vedaldi, and P. H. S. Torr,
“Fully-convolutional Siamese networks for object tracking,” in Proc.
Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV). Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2016,
pp. 850–865.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 61, 2023

[43] B. Li, J. Yan, W. Wu, Z. Zhu, and X. Hu, “High performance visual
tracking with Siamese region proposal network,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2018, pp. 8971–8980.
[44] H. Wang, X. Wu, Z. Huang, and E. P. Xing, “High-frequency component
helps explain the generalization of convolutional neural networks,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
Jun. 2020, pp. 8681–8691.
[45] F. Cotter, “Uses of complex wavelets in deep convolutional neural
networks,” Ph.D. thesis, Univ. Cambridge Repository, 2020. [Online].
Available: https://www.repository.cam.ac.uk/handle/1810/306661, doi:
10.17863/CAM.53748.
[46] B. Li, W. Wu, Q. Wang, F. Zhang, J. Xing, and J. Yan, “SiamRPN++:
Evolution of Siamese visual tracking with very deep networks,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2019,
pp. 4277–4286.
[47] R. Fan, H. Wang, Y. Wang, M. Liu, and I. Pitas, “Graph attention layer
evolves semantic segmentation for road pothole detection: A benchmark
and algorithms,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 30, pp. 8144–8154,
2021.
[48] O. Russakovsky et al., “ImageNet large scale visual recognition challenge,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 115, no. 3, pp. 211–252, Dec. 2015.
[49] L. Huang, X. Zhao, and K. Huang, “GOT-10k: A large high-diversity
benchmark for generic object tracking in the wild,” IEEE Trans. Pattern
Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 43, no. 5, pp. 1562–1577, May 2021.
[50] E. Real, J. Shlens, S. Mazzocchi, X. Pan, and V. Vanhoucke, “YouTubeBoundingBoxes: A large high-precision human-annotated data set for
object detection in video,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), Jul. 2017, pp. 7464–7473.
[51] T.-Y. Lin et al., “Microsoft COCO: Common objects in context,” in
Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV). Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2014,
pp. 740–755.
[52] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for
image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 770–778.
[53] M. Müller, N. Smith, and B. Ghanem, “A benchmark and simulator
for UAV tracking,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV). Cham,
Switzerland: Springer, 2016, pp. 445–461.
[54] D. Du et al., “The unmanned aerial vehicle benchmark: Object detection
and tracking,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV), Munich,
Germany, 2018, pp. 370–386.
[55] S. Li and D.-Y. Yeung, “Visual object tracking for unmanned aerial
vehicles: A benchmark and new motion models,” in Proc. AAAI/Assoc.
Advancement Artif. Intell., 2017, pp. 4140–4146.
[56] D. Du et al., “VisDrone-SOT2019: The vision meets drone single object
tracking challenge results,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis.
Workshop (ICCVW), Oct. 2019, pp. 199–212.
[57] C. Fu, B. Li, F. Ding, F. Lin, and G. Lu, “Correlation filters for
unmanned aerial vehicle-based aerial tracking: A review and experimental evaluation,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Mag., vol. 10, no. 1,
pp. 125–160, Mar. 2022.
[58] C. Fu et al., “Siamese object tracking for unmanned aerial vehicle:
A review and comprehensive analysis,” 2022, arXiv:2205.04281.
[59] Y. Wu, J. Lim, and M.-H. Yang, “Object tracking benchmark,” IEEE
Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 37, no. 9, pp. 1834–1848,
Sep. 2015.
[60] X. Wang et al., “Dynamic attention guided multi-trajectory analysis
for single object tracking,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol.,
vol. 31, no. 12, pp. 4895–4908, Dec. 2021.
[61] L. Huang, X. Zhao, and K. Huang, “GlobalTrack: A simple and strong
baseline for long-term tracking,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2020,
vol. 34, no. 7, pp. 11037–11044.
[62] Z. Chen, B. Zhong, G. Li, S. Zhang, and R. Ji, “Siamese box adaptive
network for visual tracking,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 6667–6676.
[63] Y. Xu, Z. Wang, Z. Li, Y. Yuan, and G. Yu, “SiamFC++: Towards robust
and accurate visual tracking with target estimation guidelines,” in Proc.
AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 34, no. 7, Apr. 2020, pp. 12549–12556.
[64] D. Guo, J. Wang, Y. Cui, Z. Wang, and S. Chen, “SiamCAR: Siamese
fully convolutional classification and regression for visual tracking,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
Jun. 2020, pp. 6268–6276.
[65] Y. Xue, G. Jin, T. Shen, L. Tan, J. Yang, and X. Hou, “MobileTrack:
Siamese efficient mobile network for high-speed UAV tracking,” IET
Image Process., vol. 16, no. 12, pp. 3300–3313, Oct. 2022.
[66] H. Nam and B. Han, “Learning multi-domain convolutional neural
networks for visual tracking,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 4293–4302.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Xi'an Jiaotong-Liverpool University. Downloaded on April 11,2025 at 08:28:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XUE et al.: SmallTrack: WAVELET POOLING AND GRAPH ENHANCED CLASSIFICATION

5618815

[67] M. Danelljan, G. Bhat, F. S. Khan, and M. Felsberg, “ECO: Efficient
convolution operators for tracking,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jul. 2017, pp. 6931–6939.
[68] S. Yun, J. Choi, Y. Yoo, K. Yun, and J. Y. Choi, “Action-decision
networks for visual tracking with deep reinforcement learning,” in
Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jul. 2017,
pp. 1349–1358.
[69] X. Li, C. Ma, B. Wu, Z. He, and M.-H. Yang, “Target-aware deep
tracking,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 1369–1378.
[70] G. Bhat, M. Danelljan, L. Van Gool, and R. Timofte, “Learning
discriminative model prediction for tracking,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int.
Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019, pp. 6181–6190.
[71] M. Danelljan, L. Van Gool, and R. Timofte, “Probabilistic regression
for visual tracking,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 7181–7190.
[72] N. Wang, W. Zhou, J. Wang, and H. Li, “Transformer meets tracker:
Exploiting temporal context for robust visual tracking,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021,
pp. 1571–1580.
[73] X. Chen, B. Yan, J. Zhu, D. Wang, X. Yang, and H. Lu, “Transformer
tracking,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2021, pp. 8122–8131.
[74] M. Danelljan, A. Robinson, F. S. Khan, and M. Felsberg, “Beyond correlation filters: Learning continuous convolution operators for visual tracking,” in Computer Vision—ECCV 2016. Cham, Switzerland: Springer,
2016, pp. 472–488.
[75] B. Yan, H. Peng, K. Wu, D. Wang, J. Fu, and H. Lu, “LightTrack:
Finding lightweight neural networks for object tracking via one-shot
architecture search,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021, pp. 15175–15184.
[76] Z. Zhu, Q. Wang, B. Li, W. Wu, J. Yan, and W. Hu, “Distractoraware Siamese networks for visual object tracking,” in Proc. Eur. Conf.
Comput. Vis. (ECCV). Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2018, :101-117.
[77] Q. Wang, L. Zhang, L. Bertinetto, W. Hu, and P. H. S. Torr, “Fast
online object tracking and segmentation: A unifying approach,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2019,
pp. 1328–1338.
[78] A. Lukežic, J. Matas, and M. Kristan, “D3S—A discriminative single
shot segmentation tracker,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 7131–7140.
[79] P. Voigtlaender, J. Luiten, P. H. S. Torr, and B. Leibe, “Siam R-CNN:
Visual tracking by re-detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 6577–6587.
[80] Z. Zhang, H. Peng, J. Fu, B. Li, and W. Hu, “Ocean: Object-aware
anchor-free tracking,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV). Cham,
Switzerland: Springer, 2020, pp. 771–787.
[81] Y. Song et al., “VITAL: Visual tracking via adversarial learning,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2018,
pp. 8990–8999.
[82] E. Park and A. C. Berg, “Meta-tracker: Fast and robust online adaptation
for visual object trackers,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2018,
pp. 587–604.
[83] Z. Zhang and H. Peng, “Deeper and wider Siamese networks for realtime visual tracking,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 4586–4595.
[84] I. Jung, J. Son, M. Baek, and B. Han, “Real-time MDNet,” in Proc. Eur.
Conf. Comput. Vis., 2018, pp. 89–104.
[85] L. Van der Maaten and G. Hinton, “Visualizing data using t-SNE,”
J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 9, no. 11, pp. 1–10, 2008.

Guodong Jin received the B.S. and M.S. degrees
from the Xi’an Research Institute of Hi-Tech, Xi’an,
China, in 2001 and 2004, respectively, and the Ph.D.
degree from Northwestern Polytechnical University,
Xi’an, in 2009.
He is currently an Associate Professor with the
Xi’an Research Institute of Hi-Tech. Currently,
he has published more than 20 articles in journals
which can be indexed by SCI and EI. His research
interests are computer vision, pattern recognition,
and object location.

Yuanliang Xue received the B.S. and M.S. degrees
from the Xi’an Research Institute of Hi-Tech, Xi’an,
China, in 2019 and 2021, respectively, where he is
currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree.
His research interests include visual tracking for
unmanned aerial vehicles and computer vision.

Lianfeng Wang received the Ph.D. degree from the
Xi’an Research Institute of Hi-Tech, Xi’an, China,
in 2013.
Currently, he is a Lecture with the Xi’an Research
Institute of Hi-Tech. His research interests include
electronic countermeasures, image processing, and
machine learning.

Tao Shen received the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees
from the Xi’an Research Institute of Hi-Tech, Xi’an,
China, in 2000, 2003, and 2008, respectively.
Currently, he is a Professor with the Xi’an
Research Institute of Hi-Tech. His research interests
include electronic countermeasures, image processing, and machine learning.

Lining Tan received the Ph.D. degree in armament
science and technology from the Xi’an Research
Institute of Hi-Tech, Xi’an, China, in 2013.
He is currently an Associate Professor with the
Xi’an Research Institute of Hi-Tech, and leading
more than five projects related to the military applications of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs). He has
published more than 30 journals and conference
papers related to the state estimation and control,
target detection, tracking, and localization of UAVs.
His research areas are vision object locating, state
estimation, and control of UAVs.

Nian Wang received the B.S. and M.S. degrees
from the Xi’an Research Institute of Hi-Tech, Xi’an,
China, in 2019 and 2021, respectively, where he is
currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree.
His research interests focus on multiview graphbased clustering, feature selection, image dehazing,
hyperspectral image classification, etc.

Jing Gao received the Ph.D. degree in computer
science and technology from the Xi’an Research
Institute of Hi-Tech, Xi’an, China, in 2013.
Currently, she is an Associate Professor with the
Xi’an Research Institute of Hi-Tech. Her research
interests include image processing and machine
learning.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Xi'an Jiaotong-Liverpool University. Downloaded on April 11,2025 at 08:28:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

