IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

4708011

A Lightweight Fusion Strategy With Enhanced
Interlayer Feature Correlation for Small
Object Detection
Yao Xiao , Tingfa Xu , Xin Yu , Yuqiang Fang , and Jianan Li

Abstract— Detecting small objects in drone imagery is challenging due to low resolution and background blending, leading
to limited feature information. Multiscale feature fusion can
enhance detection by capturing information at different scales,
but traditional strategies fall short. Simple concatenation or addition operations do not fully utilize multiscale fusion advantages,
resulting in insufficient correlation between features. This inadequacy hinders the detection of small objects, especially in complex
backgrounds and densely populated areas. To address this
issue and efficiently utilize the limited computational resources,
we propose a lightweight fusion strategy based on enhanced
interlayer feature correlation (EFC) to replace the traditional
feature fusion strategy in feature pyramid network (FPN). The
semantic expressions of different layers in the feature pyramid
are inconsistent. In EFC, the grouped feature focus unit (GFF)
enhances the feature correlation of each layer by focusing on
the contextual information of different features. The multilevel
feature reconstruction module (MFR) effectively reconstructs and
transforms the strength and weakness information of each layer
in the pyramid to reduce redundant feature fusion and retain
more information about small targets in deep networks. It is
noteworthy that the proposed method is plug-and-play and can be
widely applied to various base networks. Extensive experiments
and comprehensive evaluations on VisDrone, unmanned aerial
vehicle benchmark object detection and tracking (UAVDT), and
microsoft common objects in context (COCO) demonstrate the
effectiveness. Using generalized focal loss (GFL) as the baseline on the VisDrone dataset with a large number of small
targets, the proposed method improves the detection mean
average precision (mAP) by 1.7%, surpassing many lightweight
state-of-the-art methods and significantly reducing the Params
and GFLOPs at the neck end. The code will be available at
https://github.com/nuliweixiao/EFC.git.

Received 8 July 2024; revised 29 August 2024; accepted
2 September 2024. Date of publication 10 September 2024; date of current
version 26 September 2024. This work was supported by the Natural Science
Foundation of Chongqing, China, under Grant cstc2021jcyj-msxmX1130.
(Corresponding authors: Tingfa Xu; Jianan Li; Yuqiang Fang.)
Yao Xiao and Xin Yu are with Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing
100081, China (e-mail: 3220220586@bit.edu.cn; 3220220587@bit.edu.cn).
Tingfa Xu is with Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China,
also with the Key Laboratory of Photoelectronic Imaging Technology and
System, Ministry of Education of China, Beijing 100081, China, and also
with Beijing Institute of Technology Chongqing Innovation Center, Chongqing
401135, China (e-mail: ciom_xtf1@bit.edu.cn).
Yuqiang Fang is with the National Key Laboratory of Space Target
Awareness, Space Engineering University, Beijing 101416, China (e-mail:
fangyuqiang@nudt.edu.cn).
Jianan Li is with Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China,
and also with the Key Laboratory of Photoelectronic Imaging Technology
and System, Ministry of Education of China, Beijing 100081, China (e-mail:
lijianan@bit.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TGRS.2024.3457155

Index Terms— Feature fusion, lightweight, small object
detection.

I. I NTRODUCTION
N RECENT years, object detection for drones has gained
significant momentum in applications such as remote sensing, traffic monitoring, search operations, and security [1],
[2], [3], [4], [5]. The successful implementation of these
applications relies on the rapid and effective recognition of
objects within drone-captured images. Drone object detection
presents unique challenges. On the one hand, drone images are
characterized by high resolution and significant background
noise, which can obscure target objects and make detection
more difficult. On the other hand, the hardware limitations of
drones necessitate improvements in detection accuracy within
these resource constraints.
Small object detection, in particular, is a challenging task
in drone imagery due to the low resolution of small objects,
which makes them more susceptible to noise and results
in limited effective information. During convolutional neural
network (CNN) feature extraction, small objects are prone
to feature disappearance. To address this, multiscale feature fusion enhances the network’s ability to perceive small
objects by enriching their feature representation. This approach
captures target information at various scales and provides
high-resolution feature maps, which are essential for precise
localization and recognition.
The feature pyramid network (FPN) [6] is a widely adopted
model that generates pyramid-style multiscale features by
integrating adjacent layers in the backbone network. This
fusion combines deep abstract semantic features with shallow
high-resolution features, thereby enhancing feature expression
across different scales. However, traditional fusion methods
in FPN, such as simple concatenation or addition operations,
do not fully exploit the benefits of multiscale fusion. As shown
in Fig. 1, low-resolution features are upsampled and fused with
adjacent layers solely by stacking and channel fusion, without
fully considering their correlation. This oversight restricts
the utilization of correlated features from each layer, thus
diminishing the representation of multiscale information.
At the feature fusion stage, the fused information is sent
to the detection head structure through a 3 × 3 convolution
layer. Utilizing large kernel convolutions in the deep layers
often generates redundant information, wasting computational
resources. Additionally, features from the top of the pyra-

I

1558-0644 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: China Three Gorges University. Downloaded on November 28,2024 at 11:02:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4708011

Fig. 1. Traditional fusion strategy has several drawbacks, including weak
correlation between features from different layers and the generation of redundant features after fusion. Detecting small objects is challenging due to their
small size, which makes them prone to information loss in deep networks and
susceptible to being overshadowed by background noise. GFF significantly
improves the representation of small object information across feature maps,
while feature reconstruction MFR addresses the issue of irreversible loss of
small object information in deep networks.

mid already possess high-level semantic information. Passing
them through large kernel convolutions can cause semantic
deviations with shallow features, making small target feature
information more abstract and difficult to match with their
spatial positions.
We note that traditional fusion methods in the neck of
the network are insufficient for fully leveraging the benefits of multiscale feature fusion. It is crucial to perform
hierarchical deconstruction of features. In response to the
aforementioned issues, we propose a lightweight feature fusion
strategy, named enhanced interlayer feature correlation (EFC).
This strategy extends the conventional two-layer feature map
fusion architecture through two specially designed modules.
By focusing on spatial contextual information and the commonality between interlayer features, this strategy enhances
semantic representation between features to improve the learning of multiscale features. Specifically, we first design the
grouped feature focusing unit (GFF) to obtain global information and enhance the correlation of fused features. This process
mainly includes spatial focusing, feature grouping and fusion,
and spatial mapping normalization. This addresses the issues
of poor feature correlation and matching in traditional fusion
strategies, providing richer contextual information that helps
the model more accurately locate small objects. Subsequently,
we introduce the multilevel feature reconstruction (MFR)
module to replace the 3×3 convolutions in the network’s neck.
The MFR separates the strong and weak information among
features, directs their transformation, and achieves high-level
feature aggregation. By reconstructing features, it reduces the
semantic deviation that occurs when combining shallow and
deep features. This approach aims to reduce feature redundancy introduced by fusion and transformation, minimize the
loss of small object feature information in deep networks, and
enhance the representation of small objects. It is worth noting
that the method can be flexibly applied to various detectors
utilizing multiscale feature fusion.
We validate the effectiveness of our proposed method using
mainstream frameworks and various backbone networks on

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

widely used datasets including VisDrone [7], unmanned aerial
vehicle benchmark object detection, and tracking (UAVDT)
[8], and microsoft common objects in context (COCO) [9].
Experiments demonstrate that our method is effective not only
for small object detection but also significantly reduces the
parameter count and GFLOPs at the neck stage.
Before delving into the specifics of our method, we summarize our contributions as follows.
1) We propose a lightweight feature fusion strategy with
enhanced interlayer feature correlation, termed EFC,
which efficiently detects small objects.
2) We introduce GFFs to aggregate contextual information
and enhance the correlation between features at different
layers.
3) We introduce a feature reconstruction module (FRM)
to replace large-kernel convolutions in deep networks,
reducing the loss of subtle information and the generation of redundant features, thereby minimizing resource
consumption.
II. R ELATED W ORK
A. General Object Detection
Object detection is a fundamental task in computer vision,
aimed at identifying the categories and locations of objects
within a given image. Currently, object detection methods can
be broadly categorized into two types: two-stage detectors
based on the RCNN series [10], [11], [12], and single-stage
detectors based on the SSD [13] and YOLO series [14]. Twostage detectors first localize candidate regions in the image
and then classify each candidate region using a classifier.
On the other hand, single-stage detectors adopt an end-toend approach, simultaneously performing localization and
classification within the same network. Generally, two-stage
detection methods tend to achieve higher precision but slower
detection speeds compared to single-stage detection methods.
However, RetinaNet [15], as a single-stage detector, achieves
detection performance on par with two-stage detectors. Similar
to generalized focal loss (GFL) [16], it treats anchors as the
final bounding box targets. Although these methods perform
well in general object detection tasks, they are not satisfactory
when applied to drone images that contain a large number of
small objects. In this article, we introduce our proposed small
object detection method and apply it to different detectors to
demonstrate its effectiveness.
B. Small Object Detection
Small object detection has always been a challenging problem due to the difficulty in localizing objects with limited
size. In recent years, many approaches have been proposed
to address this issue [17], [18], [19]. Data augmentation
techniques have been employed to mitigate the scarcity of
small object data [20]. Increasing the resolution of input
features enlarges the size of small objects [21], enhancing
localization capabilities. However, this significantly increases
the model’s complexity and reduces detection speed. QueryDet [22] utilizes high-resolution features and introduces a
novel query mechanism to accelerate the inference speed of

Authorized licensed use limited to: China Three Gorges University. Downloaded on November 28,2024 at 11:02:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XIAO et al.: LIGHTWEIGHT FUSION STRATEGY WITH EFC FOR SMALL OBJECT DETECTION

feature pyramid-based object detectors, addressing the issue
of high computational resource consumption. CEASC [23]
develops a context-enhanced sparse convolution to capture
global information and enhance focus features, balancing
detection accuracy and efficiency while greatly reducing the
computational complexity of detecting high-resolution images.
Most of these methods focus on improving the detection
head to enhance network performance. In contrast, our work
primarily improves the neck stage, addressing the shortcomings in fusing high-resolution and low-resolution features
to solve the problems of weak feature representation and
difficult localization of small objects in the network. Notably,
our method can be directly applied to the aforementioned
approaches.
C. Feature Enhancement and Fusion Methods
The construction of feature pyramids is a crucial step in
many computer vision tasks and is an integral component
of modern detectors, forming the foundation for addressing
multiscale problems. For smaller targets, the feature map
often contains effective information from only a few or
even just one pixel. Therefore, research on feature fusion
methods is particularly important for accurately representing
the feature information of small targets. The FPN builds a
top–down pathway that combines features at various levels
to achieve multiscale feature fusion. PANet [24], based on
FPN, introduces a bottom–up path, facilitating the fusion of
high-resolution information with stronger semantic features.
Subsequently, NAS-FPN [25] and BiFPN [26] are proposed to
enhance the fusion of multiscale features. Unlike many works
focusing on cross-scale connections, A2-FPN [27] explores
node operations on aggregated features, utilizing attention
mechanisms to guide feature fusion. Although this method
enhances detection performance, it significantly increases
computational complexity. In this article, we investigate the
fundamental issues of feature fusion and achieve superior
detection performance with a computational complexity far
lower than that of the original FPN.
D. Lightweight Structural Design
CNNs have achieved remarkable results in computer vision
tasks, but this often comes with significant computational
resource demands. A key goal is to attain better performance with limited computational resources. Techniques such
as knowledge distillation and network pruning are commonly employed to lighten models. Additionally, there are
efforts focused on lightweight backbone networks, such as
MobileNet [28] and ShuffleNet [29], as well as lightweight
detection heads [22], [23]. In contrast, our work focuses
on the feature pyramid portion of the network. We address
existing deficiencies in feature fusion by optimizing the feature
fusion structure to efficiently utilize computational resources.
This approach minimizes the fusion and extraction of ineffective features, achieving a balance between efficiency and
complexity.
III. M ETHOD
In this section, we provide a detailed introduction to our
proposed lightweight fusion strategy with EFC, designed to

4708011

optimize the fusion of features across different layers. The
EFC consists of two main components: the GFF and the MFR.
The GFF enhances the correlation between adjacent features
and focuses on key information. The MFR separates strong
and weak spatial information, utilizing a lightweight convolutional module to achieve precise feature transformation. This
method reduces the extraction of irrelevant information while
preserving crucial details of small objects in deep networks.
A. Grouped Feature Focus Unit
1) Spatial Concentration: To effectively combine the
semantics of adjacent layers from the backbone network,
which possess varying degrees of abstract semantic information, and to extract relevant feature information from different
channels, we introduce a GFF. This unit enhances the correlation between features and improves the expression of
information. As illustrated in Fig. 2, Pi ∈ RC1 ×(H/2)×(W/2) and
Pi−1 ∈ RC×H ×W represent single-stage features from different
stages. The low-resolution feature Pi is first upsampled using
linear interpolation, followed by a 1 × 1 convolution to
ensure that the channel number of the feature map remains
consistent. This processed feature is then element-wise added
with the high-resolution feature Pi−1 to obtain the coarse
feature Pc ∈ RC×H ×W . To refine this feature and acquire
context-aware information, we use a 1 × 1 convolution to
compress the feature into a single channel to aggregate spatial
information, followed by sigmoid activation to generate spatial
aggregation weights ωs ∈ R1×H ×W . The feature Ps ∈ RC×H ×W
containing spatial information can be calculated as
ωs = Sigmoid(Conv(Pi ⊕ Pi−1 ))
Ps = (Pc ⊗ ωs )

(1)
(2)

where ⊗ is element-wise multiplication and ⊕ is element-wise
summation. Sigmoid represents an activation function. Conv
represents 1 × 1 convolutional layer.
2) Feature Correlation: To enhance the correlation between
adjacent features, we divide the spatially aggregated feature
Ps into n groups along the channel dimension, and perform
feature interaction on a per-group basis. Specifically, we refine
the feature information of adjacent channels within each group
g
[Ps ]n=i ∈ R(C/n)×H ×W using a convolution module. The global
g
features from different channels in group [Ps ]n=i undergo the
transformation to generate an attention mask ωg that captures
inter channel feature correlations. This mask ωg is then applied
to the refined feature. Finally, the features from each group
are concatenated to form the aggregated and highly correlated
adjacent features Pg ∈ RC×H ×W . The entire computation
process is as follows:
g 
g 
Pgi = Softmax F [Ps ]n=i
⊗ N [Ps ]n=i
(3)
Pg = Pg1 ∪ Pg2 · · · ∪ Pgi
(4)
where F and N represent the fused interaction layer and
convolutional transformation layer, respectively. ∪ is concatenation. Pgi represents each highly correlated feature group.
Softmax is used as an activation function to generate the
attention masks.

Authorized licensed use limited to: China Three Gorges University. Downloaded on November 28,2024 at 11:02:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4708011

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

Fig. 2. Detailed structure of the FPN framework based on the EFC lightweight fusion strategy (EFC). Given GFL as the base detector. It is noteworthy
that this method can be flexibly applied to any detector based on the FPN architecture. The EFC replaces traditional fusion strategies and the large kernel
convolutions in the neck with the GFF and the MFR.

3) Spatial Mapping Normalization: Finally, we embed the
grouped aggregated feature Pg into a normalization layer with
multilayered original feature fusion (MFF). We normalize
feature Pg using its mean and standard deviation, thereby
incorporating more spatial positional information from smaller
targets. Through MFF-GN, we obtain feature P f with strong
feature correlation and enriched spatial information, which can
be formulated as
Pf =

Pg − mean(Pi ⊕ Pi−1 )
std(Pi ⊕ Pi−1 )

(5)

where mean(·) and std(·) represent the mean and standard
deviation, respectively.
By employing this approach, we fully leverage semantic
information from adjacent layers and extract relevant features
across different channels, thereby enhancing the overall feature
representation.
B. Multilevel Feature Reconstruction Module
To reduce the fusion and extraction of irrelevant features
and minimize the loss of target information in deep networks,
we design a MFR. The purpose of reconstructing features is
to separate the rich information from the weaker information
contained in the feature maps from different stages of the
backbone network and to process them independently. This
allows the retention of abundant features to the greatest extent
while requiring minimal computational resources to transform
weaker features. Since information about small targets is
particularly prone to loss during feature extraction and fusion,
this process of reconstruction and independent transformation

helps mitigate the loss of small target information to some
extent.
1) Feature Separation: Specifically, as mentioned earlier,
we obtain feature Pc ∈ RC×H ×W from single-level features
Pi ∈ RC1 ×(H/2)×(W/2) and Pi−1 ∈ RC×H ×W from different
stages through operations such as upsampling, convolution,
and element-wise addition. Next, we apply average pooling
and the sigmoid function to generate information weights
across each channel, which serve as the feature weight thresholds Tc ∈ RC×1×1 . Tc can be formulated as
Tc = Sigmoid(avg(Pc ))

(6)

where avg(·) represent the average pooling.
The single-level features Pi and Pi−1 are individually processed through batch normalization (BN) [35] and activated
by the sigmoid function, generating unique weight information
ωi ∈ RC×H ×W and ωi−1 ∈ RC×H ×W at each spatial location,
which indicates the importance of different feature maps
ωi = Sigmoid(BN(Pi ))
ωi−1 = Sigmoid(BN(Pi−1 ))

(7)
(8)

where BN stands for batch normalization [35].
Next, the weight information ωi and ωi−1 from different
stages are then compared with the feature weight thresholds
Tc to obtain attention maps that capture the strength of spatial
information. Subsequently, strong and weak features from
different layers are aggregated separately to yield the enriched
features and weak features

up
ωi , ωilow = Threshold(ωi , Tc )
(9)

up
low
ωi−1 , ωi−1 = Threshold(ωi−1 , Tc )
(10)

Authorized licensed use limited to: China Three Gorges University. Downloaded on November 28,2024 at 11:02:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XIAO et al.: LIGHTWEIGHT FUSION STRATEGY WITH EFC FOR SMALL OBJECT DETECTION

4708011

C. EFC as a Feature Fusion Strategy

Fig. 3.

Following the output of the GFF, feature P f exhibits correlated features across different levels, focusing on perceptual
spatial context. Feature Pm , generated by the MFR, retains
substantial information on small-scale targets and enhances
semantic expression. The generated feature Pk results from
integrating P f and Pm at higher levels, ensuring a coherent
representation of spatial and semantic information relevant to
small targets. EFC replaces traditional, straightforward fusion
operations such as simple contact or add methods for adjacent
features.

Illustration of the structure of FTU.

where we use a threshold function to separate strong and weak
feature information.
up
2) Directional Fusion: The strong attention maps ωi and
up
ωi−1 are individually mapped onto feature Pc , and then these
two feature parts are fused to generate enriched features.
Similarly, the weak attention map is mapped onto Pc to
generate the weak features. The entire computation process
is as follows:


up
up
P up = ωi ⊗ Pc + ωi−1 ⊗ Pc
(11)


low
low
low
P = ωi ⊗ Pc + ωi−1 ⊗ Pc
(12)
where P up ∈ RC×H ×W represents the enriched features generated through reconstruction, and P low ∈ RC×H ×W represents
the weak features generated through reconstruction.
3) Feature Transformation: We transform the features P up
and P low separately. For the enriched features, we apply a 1 ×
up
1 convolution to generate feature maps Pnew that display more
detailed information. For the weak features, P low is fed into a
feature transformation unit (FTU) designed to produce feature
maps with richer semantic information using fewer computational resources. As Fig. 3 shows, we employ depthwise
separable convolutions, which have lower computational and
parameter overhead. Since depthwise separable convolutions
disrupt interchannel information flow, we generate feature
modulation between channels. After the depthwise separable convolution operation, we perform weighted mapping to
enhance information flow between channels. The weighted
features α are processed through adaptive average pooling and
convolution layers, which can be formulated as

α = Softmax T A P low
(13)
where T represents the convolutional transformation layer, and
A represents the adaptive average pooling layer.
low
4) Level-Wise Fusion: Finally, we merge the feature Pnew
,
processed through the feature transformation unit, with the
up
feature map Pnew , which displays more detailed information,
to generate the feature Pm . This feature contains both detailed
information and cross-channel information exchange. The
computation of Pm is as follows:
low
up
Pm = α Pnew
+ Pnew
.

(14)

Overall, we merge features from two different layers using
a MFR, resulting in enriched features with more detail while
reducing computational resource usage. This approach enables
the specific transformation of individual features, thereby
minimizing the generation of redundant features.

D. Analysis on Complexities
Our EFC reduces the use of large kernel convolutions
during the feature fusion stage, which helps to minimize the
generation of redundant features. We analyze the theoretical
parameter consumption, and the parameters of standard 3 ×
3 convolution are calculated as
Pst = 3 × 3 × C1 × C2

(15)

where C1 and C2 represent the number of input and output
feature channels, respectively.
EFC parameter consumption mainly occurs during the
feature transformation and feature correlation stages. The
parameter consumption of GFF and MFR, denoted as PG and
PM , respectively, is calculated as follows:


C2
C1
×
(16)
PG = 1 × 1 × C1 × 1 + n × 1 × 1 ×
n
n
PM = 3 × 3 × C1 × 1 + 3 × 1 × 1 × C1 × C2
(17)
where n represents the number of groups. In the experiment,
we set the number of channels to C1 = C2 , n = 4. The
memory usage of our method is significantly smaller than that
of standard convolution.
IV. E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we validate the effectiveness of our proposed
method using three widely adopted benchmarks: VisDrone [7],
UAVDT [8], and MS COCO [9]. We also conduct comprehensive ablation studies to thoroughly evaluate our contributions.
A. Datasets and Metrics
VisDrone is a dataset characterized by a large number of
small objects. It consists of 10 209 high-resolution (2000 ×
1500) aerial images belonging to ten categories (6471 for
training, 548 for validation, and 3190 for testing). Since the
evaluation server is currently closed, we are unable to test our
method on the test dataset. Following previous work, we use
6471 images for training and 548 images for testing. COCO
is the most widely used dataset for general object detection,
containing approximately 118K images in the train2017 set
and 5K images in the val2017 set for training and validation.
The UAVDT dataset comprises 23 258 training images and
15 069 testing images. The image resolution is approximately
1080 × 540 pixels. The dataset has been manually annotated
for three vehicle categories: car, truck, and bus.

Authorized licensed use limited to: China Three Gorges University. Downloaded on November 28,2024 at 11:02:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4708011

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

TABLE I
C OMPARISONS W ITH THE S TATE - OF - THE -A RT A PPROACHES ON V IS D RONE VALIDATION S ET. “−” I NDICATES T HAT
THE R ESULT I S NOT R EPORTED OR NOT P UBLICLY AVAILABLE

We utilize mean average precision (mAP) as the metrics
for evaluating accuracy. We also use GFLOPs and Params to
verify the complexity of the model.

TABLE II
C OMPARISONS W ITH S TATE - OF - THE -A RT D ETECTORS ON UAVDT.“−”
I NDICATES T HAT THE R ESULT I S NOT R EPORTED
OR NOT P UBLICLY AVAILABLE

B. Implementation Details
We implement our method based on the MMDetection
framework [41]. All experiments are conducted on an NVIDIA
GeForce RTX 3080 GPU. On VisDrone, we train all detectors
with a batch size of 4 for 15 epochs, starting with an initial
learning rate of 0.01. This learning rate follows a linear
warm-up strategy and is decreased by a factor of 0.1 at epochs
11 and 14. On COCO, we train detectors with a batchsize
of 4 for 12 epochs with an initial learning rate of 0.01, and
decrease it by 0.1 after 8 and 11 epochs. On UAVDT, we train
models for six epochs using an initial learning rate of 0.01.
After the four and five epochs, the learning rate is decreased
by a factor of 10. The input image sizes are set to 1333 ×
800 on VisDrone and COCO. On UAVDT, the input image
sizes are set to 1024 × 540. We utilize GFL and RetinaNet as
the base detectors. The output channels of the neck are set to
512 by default on the VisDrone dataset. All other parameters
are configured according to the CEASC [23] guidelines.
C. Results on VisDrone Dataset
1) Evaluation on Different Detectors: EFC can be flexibly
integrated into various state-of-the-art baseline detectors that
utilize the FPN network. To validate the effectiveness of the
method, we combine it with different state-of-the-art baseline detectors, including GFL and RetinaNet, using various
backbone networks. The results, presented in Table I, demonstrate that by incorporating our method, both the number
of parameters and the GFLOPs are reduced while detection
accuracy improves compared to the baseline models. Specifically, by replacing the FPN in RetinaNet with our approach,

the detection accuracy (AP) increased by 3.1%, while the
computational load of the model decreased by 17.7%. Using
GFL as the base detector, our method achieves 30.1 mAP.
This underscores the superiority of our method in small object
detection. It is worth noting that using our method reduces
the GFLOPs by 42.7% and Params by 20.1% compared to the
original FPN network’s neck.
2) Comparison With State-of-the-Art Methods: We report
the results of comparing our proposed method with state-ofthe-art lightweight methods, including lightweight backbone
networks ShuffleNet V2 [29] and MobileNet V2 [28],
as well as lightweight detection heads QueryDet [22] and
CEASC [23]. For a fair comparison, our method employs the
same data augmentation techniques as QueryDet and CEASC.
As summarized in Table I, our method significantly improves
detection accuracy while reducing Parameters and GFLOPs.
Using GFL as the baseline, by replacing the lightweight
backbone networks MobileNet V2 and ShuffleNet V2, their
accuracy improvement is minimal. Using the lightweight
detection head CEASC, although GFLOPs are greatly reduced,
the detection accuracy improvement is minimal. Using GFL as
the base detector, our method improves the detection accuracy

Authorized licensed use limited to: China Three Gorges University. Downloaded on November 28,2024 at 11:02:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XIAO et al.: LIGHTWEIGHT FUSION STRATEGY WITH EFC FOR SMALL OBJECT DETECTION

4708011

Fig. 4. Visualization of the detection results and heatmaps on VisDrone. The highlighted areas represent the regions that the network is focusing on. This
demonstrates the superior performance of the proposed EFC method in small object detection.
TABLE III
C OMPARISONS W ITH S TATE - OF - THE -A RT D ETECTORS ON COCO T EST-D EV. “−” I NDICATES T HAT THE R ESULT
I S NOT R EPORTED OR NOT P UBLICLY AVAILABLE

mAP by 1.7% and 1.4% compared to the baseline model
and CEASC, respectively. Our method greatly improves the
detection accuracy of small targets through the fusion method
on the neck end. This achieves a balance between model
complexity and detection accuracy, and our method can be
used simultaneously with other lightweight methods.
3) Visualization of Detection Results: To illustrate the
advantages of our method more intuitively, we visualize the
heatmaps of both the baseline model and our method in Fig. 4.
From the results, it is evident that our method improves the
receptive field for small objects, particularly in areas where
the targets are dense and farther away from the camera,
resulting in better detection results. This superior performance
is due to our feature fusion process, which reduces the loss of
small object information and increases the correlation between
features.

D. Results on UAVDT Dataset
1) Comparison With State-of-the-Art Methods: The
UAVDT dataset contains numerous small targets and includes
many low-light, complex background images, which can
better reflect the performance of networks in small target
detection. In Table II, we report the performance of our
method on the UAVDT dataset. Using GFL as the baseline
model, we achieve a 2.0% improvement in AP50 , surpassing
many state-of-the-art methods. Compared to the latest
lightweight method CEASC, our detection accuracy improves
by 0.9% in AP, 0.6% in AP50 , and 1.1% in AP75 . The results
demonstrate that our method performs well in object detection
for UAV images.
2) Visualization Performance: Small target information is
easily overwhelmed by environmental noise, resulting in
extremely limited small target details. Moreover, under low-

Authorized licensed use limited to: China Three Gorges University. Downloaded on November 28,2024 at 11:02:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4708011

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

Fig. 5. Visualizations of the detection results of ClusDet, DREN, and GFL, and our proposed method under low light and similar background conditions on
UAVDT. On the left side are the original images to be detected, and on the right side are the localized effect images detected by different methods. Red box
is the ground truth, green box is the prediction, and purple box represents the advantage detection results of our method.

Fig. 6. Qualitative results comparison between RetinaNet and our method on COCO dataset. Red box is the ground truth, and green box is the prediction.
The feature maps are derived from the first stage of the feature pyramid. The brighter color represents that the model pays more attention to that area.

light conditions, targets tend to blend into the background,
making detection challenging. Our approach focuses on
integrating this limited small target information to achieve
high-level feature expression. As illustrated in Fig. 5, we visualize the detection performance under low-light conditions
and compare it visually with other state-of-the-art methods.
From the figures, it is evident that ClusDet [31], DREN [40],
and GFL struggle to detect some targets that resemble the
background, thus being susceptible to background interference. In contrast, our method effectively utilizes the limited
small target information to detect targets, demonstrating its
superiority.
E. Results on COCO Dataset
1) Quantitative Evaluation: The COCO dataset is widely
used and includes many small objects. We perform quantitative comparisons using our method across different baseline
models and compare them with some state-of-the-art methods.

The results on the COCO 2017 test-dev are summarized
in Table III. Our method also shows a significant improvement in detection accuracy on this general dataset. It is
worth noting that we use different baseline models to
demonstrate that our method can be widely applied to various detectors and can further enhance the performance
of state-of-the-art methods. Using RetinaNet and GFL as
baseline models, our method increases AP S by 1.7% and
1.4%, respectively. The experimental results indicate that
our method is effective not only for small object detection
in UAV images but also for general small object detection
tasks.
2) Visualization of Feature Map: To study the feature representation of our method, we visualize the first layer feature
maps of the feature pyramid, comparing it with the baseline
model. As shown in Fig. 6, our method integrates richer
and more representative features compared to the baseline
model.

Authorized licensed use limited to: China Three Gorges University. Downloaded on November 28,2024 at 11:02:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XIAO et al.: LIGHTWEIGHT FUSION STRATEGY WITH EFC FOR SMALL OBJECT DETECTION

4708011

TABLE IV

TABLE VI

A BLATION ON GFF AND MFR W ITH GFL AS THE BASE
D ETECTOR ON V IS D RONE

A BLATION E XPERIMENTS ON V IS D RONE DATASET W ITH
VARYING N UMBERS OF G ROUPS

TABLE VII
C OMPARISON OF D IFFERENT N ORMALIZATION M ETHODS ON V IS D RONE
TABLE V
C OMPARING D IFFERENT M ETHODS OF O BTAINING S PATIAL
I NFORMATION ON V IS D RONE

F. Ablation Study
In this section, we conduct comprehensive ablation experiments to analyze the impact of the key components within
the GFF and the MFR. Notably, all ablation experiments are
carried out on the VisDrone dataset, with GFL as the baseline
model and ResNet18 as the backbone network.
1) Effectiveness of Different Components: To validate the
effectiveness of the EFC fusion strategy, we replace the traditional fusion structure with our proposed method and conduct
ablation experiments on its two key components: the GFF and
the MFR. The baseline model employs the classic FPN and
PAFPN structures. As illustrated in Table IV, each component
of our method significantly enhances detection accuracy compared to the baseline model. The GFF enhances the correlation
between features and strengthens the dependence of small
objects across features, allowing for the perception of more
semantic information. This leads to a 1.2% increase in AP
compared to the baseline model. The MFR, which replaces the
3 × 3 convolutions in the neck, greatly reduces the computational resources consumed by the neck. Compared to PAFPN,
the parameter count and GFLOPs decrease by 23.1% and
8.8%, respectively. Additionally, by reconstructing features,
the loss of small object information in deep convolutions is
mitigated, resulting in an improvement of 1.0% in detection
accuracy.
2) Ablation Study on GFF: We evaluate the spatial attention
mechanism for perceiving contextual information, the number
of grouped units, and the MFF-GN structure within the GFF
separately. To capture contextual information from different
layers, we use spatial attention for focusing. We compare
this approach with several other context-aware methods, such
as Point-wise, CBAM [42], and standard 3 × 3 convolutions. As shown in Table V, utilizing the spatial attention
module highlights its advantages in accuracy and resource
utilization compared to the mentioned methods. The standard 3 × 3 convolution achieves almost the same detection

accuracy, however, this comes at the cost of high computational resources. Our method achieves the best detection
performance with the lowest GFLOPs and Params.
Next, we investigate the impact of varying the number of
groups on detection accuracy, as shown in Table VI. The
results indicate that setting the number of groups to four
achieves a favorable balance between detection accuracy and
efficiency.
To enhance spatial mappings from features across different layers and improve the representation of features for
small objects in the original space, we employ MFF-GN
for normalization. To evaluate the performance of MFF-GN,
we compare it with other normalization techniques such as
BN [35], group normalization (GN) [43], switchable normalization (SN) [44], instance normalization (IN) [45], and
standard 1 × 1 convolutions, as well as the baseline detector
without normalization. As shown in Table VII, compared
to other normalization methods, MFF-GN achieves the best
detection accuracy. It outperforms GN by 0.2% in AP and also
demonstrates advanced computational resource utilization.
3) Ablation Study on MFR: We transform the reconstructed
strong and weak features separately, aiming to preserve the
rich features and convert the weaker ones. This approach helps
retain more subtle information of small objects while saving
computational resources. For strong features, we refine them
using 1 × 1 convolutions, while weak features are transformed
using lightweight computational methods. To validate the
superiority of our transformation module, we compare FTU
with other lightweight convolution modules, including depthwise separable convolutions [46], group convolutions [47], and
partial convolutions [48]. As shown in Table VIII, the table
unequivocally demonstrates that the FTU module surpasses
other methods in terms of performance while consuming fewer
computational resources, achieving a commendable balance
between accuracy and efficiency. Specifically, compared to
DWConv, GConv, and PConv, the AP is improved by 0.6%,
0.3%, and 0.4%, respectively. Moreover, the 3 × 3 standard
convolution and FTU achieve similar levels of accuracy, yet
with significantly increased GFLOPs and Params.

Authorized licensed use limited to: China Three Gorges University. Downloaded on November 28,2024 at 11:02:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4708011

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

TABLE VIII
C OMPARISON OF D IFFERENT L IGHTWEIGHT C ONVOLUTION M ETHODS
FOR F EATURE T RANSFORMATION ON V IS D RONE

TABLE IX
C OMPARING THE I MPACT OF D IFFERENT C OMPONENT C ONFIGURATIONS
IN S TRONG AND W EAK F EATURE T RANSFORMATION ON V IS D RONE .
P UP AND P LOW R EPRESENT THE S TRONG AND W EAK F EATURES

To highlight the advantages of separately transforming
strong and weak features, we design a series of variant
experiments to demonstrate that our configuration is optimal.
As shown in Table IX, weak features are enhanced through
FTU to improve feature information, while strong features are
processed with 1 × 1 convolutions to reveal more detailed
information. This process achieves high-level feature transformation, which helps enhance the representation of small object
information.
V. C ONCLUSION
In this work, we propose an EFC lightweight fusion strategy
(EFC) which includes the GFF to increase the correlation
between features and enhance the spatial mapping of small
object information. We also introduce the MFR, which aims to
separate and reconstruct features from different layers, utilizing lightweight operations for directed feature transformation.
This approach reduces the loss of small object information
in deep networks and minimizes the extraction of irrelevant
features. Notably, our proposed method can be flexibly integrated into the FPN network. Extensive experimental results on
VisDrone, UAVDT and COCO demonstrate the effectiveness
of EFC in small object detection and significantly reduce the
computational resources at the neck.
R EFERENCES
[1] X. Sun et al., “RingMo: A remote sensing foundation model with
masked image modeling,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61,
pp. 1–22, 2023, Art. no. 5612822, doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2022.3194732.
[2] Y. Zhang, M. Ye, G. Zhu, Y. Liu, P. Guo, and J. Yan, “FFCA-YOLO
for small object detection in remote sensing images,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, pp. 1–15, 2024, Art. no. 5611215, doi:
10.1109/TGRS.2024.3363057.
[3] V. Gagliardi et al., “Satellite remote sensing and non-destructive testing
methods for transport infrastructure monitoring: Advances, challenges
and perspectives,” Remote Sens., vol. 15, no. 2, p. 418, Jan. 2023.
[4] B. Huang, J. Li, J. Chen, G. Wang, J. Zhao, and T. Xu, “Anti-UAV410: A
thermal infrared benchmark and customized scheme for tracking drones
in the wild,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 46, no. 5,
pp. 2852–2865, May 2024.

[5] H. Zhao, J. Chen, L. Wang, and H. Lu, “ARKitTrack: A new
diverse dataset for tracking using mobile RGB-D data,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023,
pp. 5126–5135.
[6] T. Y. Lin, P. Dollàr, R. Girshick, K. He, B. Hariharan, and S. Belongie,
“Feature pyramid networks for object detection,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jul. 2017, pp. 2117–2125.
[7] P. Zhu et al., “Visdrone-det2018: The vision meets drone object detection
in image challenge results,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV)
Workshoph, 2018, pp. 1–28.
[8] D. Du et al., “The unmanned aerial vehicle benchmark: Object detection and tracking,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV), 2018,
pp. 370–386.
[9] T. Lin et al., “Microsoft COCO: Common objects in context,” in Proc.
Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2014, pp. 740–755.
[10] J. Li, X. Liang, S. Shen, T. Xu, J. Feng, and S. Yan, “Scale-aware fast RCNN for pedestrian detection,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia, vol. 20, no. 4,
pp. 985–996, Apr. 2018.
[11] K. He, G. Gkioxari, P. Dollár, and R. Girshick, “Mask R-CNN,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2017, pp. 2961–2969.
[12] S. Ren, K. He, R. Girshick, and J. Sun, “Faster R-CNN: Towards realtime object detection with region proposal networks,” in Proc. Adv.
Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 28, 2015, pp. 1–29.
[13] W. Liu et al., “SSD: Single shot multibox detector,” in Proc. 14th Eur.
Conf., Oct. 2016, pp. 21–37.
[14] C.-Y. Wang, A. Bochkovskiy, and H.-Y.-M. Liao, “YOLOv7: Trainable
bag-of-freebies sets new state-of-the-art for real-time object detectors,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
Jun. 2023, pp. 7464–7475.
[15] T.-Y. Lin, P. Goyal, R. Girshick, K. He, and P. Dollár, “Focal loss for
dense object detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV),
Oct. 2017, pp. 2980–2988.
[16] X. Li et al., “Generalized focal loss: Learning qualified and distributed
bounding boxes for dense object detection,” in Proc. Annu. Conf. Neural
Inf. Process. Syst. (NIPS), Dec. 2020, pp. 21002–21012.
[17] J. Li, X. Liang, Y. Wei, T. Xu, J. Feng, and S. Yan, “Perceptual generative adversarial networks for small object detection,” in
Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jul. 2017,
pp. 1951–1959.
[18] H. Zhang, S. Wen, Z. Wei, and Z. Chen, “High-resolution feature generator for small ship detection in optical remote sensing images,” IEEE
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, pp. 1–11, 2024, Art. no. 5617011,
doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2024.3377999.
[19] J. Li, S. Dong, L. Ding, and T. Xu, “MsSVT++: Mixed-scale sparse
voxel transformer with center voting for 3D object detection,” IEEE
Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 46, no. 5, pp. 3736–3752,
May 2024.
[20] J. He et al., “Towards deeply unified depth-aware panoptic segmentation
with bi-directional guidance learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf.
Comput. Vis. (ICCV), vol. 34, Oct. 2023, pp. 4088–4098.
[21] J. Wang et al., “Deep high-resolution representation learning for visual
recognition,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 43, no. 10,
pp. 3349–3364, Oct. 2020.
[22] C. Yang, Z. Huang, and N. Wang, “QueryDet: Cascaded sparse
query for accelerating high-resolution small object detection,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022,
pp. 13668–13677.
[23] B. Du, Y. Huang, J. Chen, and D. Huang, “Adaptive sparse convolutional networks with global context enhancement for faster object
detection on drone images,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Vancouver, BC, Canada, Jun. 2023,
pp. 13435–13444.
[24] S. Liu, L. Qi, H. Qin, J. Shi, and J. Jia, “Path aggregation network for
instance segmentation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit., Jun. 2018, pp. 8759–8768.
[25] G. Ghiasi, T.-Y. Lin, and Q. V. Le, “NAS-FPN: Learning scalable feature pyramid architecture for object detection,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2019,
pp. 7036–7045.
[26] M. Tan, R. Pang, and Q. V. Le, “EfficientDet: Scalable and efficient
object detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 10781–10790.
[27] M. Hu, Y. Li, L. Fang, and S. Wang, “A2-FPN: Attention aggregation
based feature pyramid network for instance segmentation,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021,
pp. 15343–15352.

Authorized licensed use limited to: China Three Gorges University. Downloaded on November 28,2024 at 11:02:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XIAO et al.: LIGHTWEIGHT FUSION STRATEGY WITH EFC FOR SMALL OBJECT DETECTION

[28] M. Sandler, A. Howard, M. Zhu, A. Zhmoginov, and L.-C. Chen,
“MobileNetV2: Inverted residuals and linear bottlenecks,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2018,
pp. 4510–4520, doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2018.00474.
[29] N. Ma, X. Zhang, H.-T. Zheng, and J. Sun, “ShuffleNet V2: Practical
guidelines for efficient CNN architecture design,” in Proc. Eur. Conf.
Comput. Vis. (ECCV), 2018, pp. 116–131.
[30] P. Zhang, Y. Zhong, and X. Li, “SlimYOLOv3: Narrower, faster and
better for real-time UAV applications,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf.
Comput. Vis. Workshop (ICCVW), Oct. 2019, pp. 37–45.
[31] F. Yang, H. Fan, P. Chu, E. Blasch, and H. Ling, “Clustered object
detection in aerial images,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis.
(ICCV), Oct. 2019, pp. 8311–8320.
[32] X. Zhang, E. Izquierdo, and K. Chandramouli, “Dense and small object
detection in UAV vision based on cascade network,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. Workshops, Apr. 2019, p. 26.
[33] C. Li, T. Yang, S. Zhu, C. Chen, and S. Guan, “Density map guided
object detection in aerial images,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit. Workshops (CVPRW), Jun. 2020, pp. 737–746.
[34] C. Liu, G. Gao, Z. Huang, Z. Hu, Q. Liu, and Y. Wang, “YOLC: You
only look clusters for tiny object detection in aerial images,” IEEE Trans.
Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 1–13, Dec. 2024.
[35] S. Ioffe and C. Szegedy, “Batch normalization: Accelerating deep
network training by reducing internal covariate shift,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Mach. Learn., 2015, pp. 448–456.
[36] S. Zhang, L. Wen, X. Bian, Z. Lei, and S. Z. Li, “Single-shot refinement
neural network for object detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2018, pp. 4203–4212.
[37] Z. Tian, C. Shen, H. Chen, and T. He, “FCOS: Fully convolutional
one-stage object detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis.
(ICCV), Oct. 2019, pp. 9627–9636.
[38] C. Zhu, Y. He, and M. Savvides, “Feature selective anchor-free module
for single-shot object detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 840–849.
[39] S. Deng et al., “A global-local self-adaptive network for drone-view
object detection,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 30, pp. 1556–1569,
2020.
[40] J. Zhang, J. Huang, X. Chen, and D. Zhang, “How to fully exploit
the abilities of aerial image detectors,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf.
Comput. Vis. Workshop (ICCVW), Oct. 2019, pp. 1–8.
[41] K. Chen et al., “MMDetection: Open MMLab detection toolbox and
benchmark,” 2019, arXiv:1906.07155.
[42] S. Woo, J. Park, J.-Y. Lee, and I. S. Kweon, “CBAM: Convolutional
block attention module,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., Sep. 2018,
pp. 3–19.
[43] Y. Wu and K. He, “Group normalization,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput.
Vis. (ECCV), 2018, pp. 3–19.
[44] P. Luo, J. Ren, Z. Peng, R. Zhang, and J. Li, “Differentiable learningto-normalize via switchable normalization,” arXiv:1806.10779, 2018.
[45] D. Ulyanov, A. Vedaldi, and V. Lempitsky, “Instance normalization: The
missing ingredient for fast stylization,” 2016, arXiv:1607.08022.
[46] L. Sifre and S. Mallat, “Rigid-motion scattering for texture classification,” 2014, arXiv:1403.1687.
[47] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “Imagenet classification
with deep convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., vol. 25, 2012, pp. 1–6.
[48] J. Chen et al., “Run, don’t walk: Chasing higher FLOPS for faster
neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.,
Aug. 2023, pp. 12021–12031.

Yao Xiao received the B.E. degree from China
Jiliang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China,
in 2022. He is currently pursuing the M.S. degree
in optical engineering with the School of Optics and
Photonics, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing,
China.
His research interests include object detection and
related computer vision problems.

4708011

Tingfa Xu received the Ph.D. degree from
Changchun Institute of Optics, Fine Mechanics and
Physics, Changchun, China, in 2004.
He is currently a Professor with the School of
Optics and Photonics, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China. His research interests include
optoelectronic imaging and detection and hyperspectral remote sensing image processing.

Xin Yu received the B.E. degree from Shandong
University, Qingdao, Shandong, China, in 2022.
He is currently pursuing the M.S. degree in optical
engineering with the School of Optics and Photonics,
Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China.
His research interests include deep learning and
object detection.

Yuqiang Fang received the Ph.D. degree in control
science and engineering from the National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China,
in 2015.
He is currently an Associate Professor with the
Space Engineering University, Beijing, China. His
research interests include machine learning, computer vision, and data mining.

Jianan Li received the B.S. and Ph.D. degrees from
the School of Optics and Photonics, Beijing Institute
of Technology, Beijing, China, in 2013 and 2019,
respectively.
From July 2015 to July 2017, he worked as a
Joint Training Ph.D. Student at National University
of Singapore, Singapore. From October 2017 to
April 2018, he worked as an Intern at Adobe
Research, San Francisco, CA, USA. He is currently
an Assistant Professor with the School of Optics
and Photonics, Beijing Institute of Technology. His
research interests mainly include computer vision and real-time image/video
processing.

Authorized licensed use limited to: China Three Gorges University. Downloaded on November 28,2024 at 11:02:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

